HAEC and HIC; OR, THE FEMININE GENDER More Worthy than the Masculine. BEING A
Vindication of that Ingenious and Innocent Sex from the Biting Sarcasms, Bitter
Satyrs, and Opprobrious Calumnies, wherewith they are daily, tho undeservedly,
Aspersed by the Virulent Tongues and Pens of Malevolent Men.

Dat Veniam Corvis Vexat Censura Columbas. Horat. LONDON, Printed by Jo.
Harefinch, for James Norris, at the Kings Arms without TempleBar. 1683.

TO ALL FAMALE READERS.
Ladies,
THIS Treatise in Commendation of YOU, I own to be but a. Collection of the
best Authors; and it is but reason that the best of Sexes should be honored
with the best of style; the Method, with some small Additions, is my own, the
rest Quotations, which I must confess ingenuously, to avoid the imputation of a
Plagiary. These Memoirs are but Mancipia paucae lectionis, the Gleanings of
slight Reading, but if accepted (which I question not) may admit of some
farther Enlargement. In this Tract I wholly submit my self to the Wise, and
little esteem the frowns of a censorious Brow. I cannot please all Men; for the
same cause that made Democritus langh, made Heraclitus weep. It Is impossible
for the most experienced Angler to take all sorts of Fish with one Bait. Should
I write never so well, I shall not please all, and never so ill I may please
some. However, Ladies, (to you I make my Address) Virtue cannot be Delineated
in too large a Volume; and the Dalliances of a Pen (tho delightful) are not
capable of describing Woman. If I write Reason, let Reason have its due Reward,
Persuasion, if not, Reproof. All that I fear is, my words may wrong your
Perfection; and if I do, upon that account, in ipso limine impingere, stumble
at the very threshold, I must rely upon your accustomed Candor and Debonairete,
not questioning in the least a Reprieve, if not a Pardon absolute from

Your Ladiship's Most Dutiful and Obedient Servant J. N.

HAEC and HIC; OR, THE FEMININE GENDER More Worthy than the Masculine.
PErfection is a Flower, that grows not in the Garden of this Sublunary World:
the fairest Day may be overcast with Clouds; the Moon has her Spots, and the
Greatest their Failings. No Person can plead Privilege from Error in this
Life; for as the Poet says, -- Nihil est ab omni
Part beatum.


These things considered, it is an astonishment to me, that this Innocent and
Harmless Sex should meet with such Calumnies (as palpable as injurious) from
Hypercritical Men; such as are Facie tantum Homines, non Animo; who bear about
them nothing but the Form of Man that is manly; whose best Elocution is the
worst Detraction, laboring to vilify them, without whose Being they had not
been; therefore to them, as to our Second Self, we owe, at least, the Duty of
Good Language. Beyond all controversy, he is a barbarous Parricide to his
Mother's Name, that ingratefully murders her Reputation who contributed to his
Generation; gave him Lodging and Diet in her own Womb; brought him into the
World with Grief, Pain, and Sorrow; bred him up in the World with Care, Cost,
and Trouble; and, in Requital, has no other Return, when he arrives at
Maturity, than Foul Ink for the pure Milk wherewith she fed him in his Infancy.
Such Persons as these, like peevish Wasps, scorn the Flower from which they
fetched their Wax, and they that Woman from whom they received Life. Seeker in
his Sermon. intitl. The Wedding-Ring.
Peace, wicked Man! unworthy to breathe, that do not love thy Breathgiver;
unworthy to have a Tongue, that speak against her through whom thou
speak. In a word, we took our Rise from their Bowels, and may take our Rest
in their Bosoms. Id. Ibid.
It Is not Good thus to play the Butcher with that Naked Sex, who have Arms, but
for Embraces. Thus we see the purest White is most subject to the smutch, and
the most unspotted Reputation to the Bespattering of Malevolent Tongues. Thus
Noble Gold down to the Bottom goes, whilst worthless Cork above does floating
lie; and, as one says very well: Cankers touch fairest Fruits with their
Infection,
And Fevers seize those of the best Complexion.


But to proceed. Those usual Satyrs and Invectives against that
Sweetly-temper'd Sex, only Betray Man's greater Imbecility; for we know, a a
good Cause needs not the Patronage of Passion, but can maintain it self by a
Moderate Dispute: besides, a serious Reflection upon Man's own Unworthiness,
methinks, should make him backward in challenging Prerogative above Woman; and
I would advise such opinionative Fops, who are Bladder'd up, as much as the
Tympany of Pride and Vanity can make them, not to have an overshooting Conceit
of themselves; but remember they are Men, whose Reason is frequently
over-clouded with Error. We are all Moles, even to the Greatest of our own
Sins; but, in a Female's Life, we can spy out the meanest Peccadillo with
Eagle's Eyes, or those as sharp, as the Epidaurean Serpent's. But certainly they
are not Men, who thus Rail against that Sex: no; they are a Viperous Brood, whom
Women, in Charity, take into their Bosoms and cherish, for which they
ingratefully sting them; a Fact so barbarous, the Turc himself would Blush to
do it to a Christian. And would it not vex a Royal Spleen? A Passion kindle in
a Stoic's Breast, to see them thus abused? Notwithstanding all this; there are
some Men, (would I could only say some) tho beyond all dispute the Children of
the Meu Peuple, of a sordid and Base Extract, who never think themselves well,
but when they are in the Predicament of injurious Passion. Nay farther, (if we
may credit Fonseca, as undoubtedly we may) he says, (and that modestly too) Non
possunt omnes Invectivae and Satyrae in Foeminas scriptae uno Volumine
comprehendi. All the Invectives and Satyrs against Women cannot be comprehended
in one Volume. Yet I Will be bold to maintain; That those Rude and Indigested
Pamphlets, which Men have scribled against that Sex, do so stink in the
Nostrils of Good Men (who have composed as much, nay more in their merited
Commendation) that they are only thought fit to be bound up with the
Metamorphosis of A-jax, and placed in Pantagruel's Library; so that in short,
this only proves, that every Countryman can produce a snarling Momus, and
every Age a scoffing Lucian; But this profligate Crew are only such, as have
vomited out of their Souls all remnants of Goodness; and who can expect a sweet
Breath from such foul Stomacs. Their Reasons (if any) are but the Froth and
Scum of Envy and Malice; the Fruits of Choler Adust, and the Evaporations of a
Vindicative Spirit: Now what they are, and of what Weight you shall soon
understand; and in order thereunto we will first remove this Rubbish from the
Foundation, for the better consolidating of the Superstructure; by
demonstrating how easily their Aspersions and Sarcasins (as full of Obloquy, as
pregnant with Impertinence) may be wiped off.

First, They object, that Male and Female God made Man, so that Man being first
named, is the worthier Person; A pretty Argument indeed! so the Evening and the
Morning made the first day; yet few will think the Night better. But the Noble
Giovanni Francisco Loredana.
Venetian, is so far from this Opinion, that he tells you plainly, had it not
been infused into Adam by Revelation, that Woman was a part of himself,
doubtless Disobedience had not been the first Prevarication, but Idolatry; for
Adam was about to adore her as a Goddess.

O! but Man was made her Governor, and so consequently, her Superior; to
which one answers very pertinently; That 'twas not the Prerogative of his
Worth, but the Punishment of her Sin; had they both stood, it is probably
conjectured she had never been in that subjection. There is one Peter Martyr.
Divine indeed, who seems to be of opinion, that Man had Priority before the
Fall; but we will confront him with a more Learned, Grave, Greek St. Chrysostom.
Father; whose knowledge and Modesty will not permit him to be positive; so
that he says he very much doubts it; which, in plain English, is no less than a
Negative; nay, the power of Commanding is in Reality, rather Political, than
from equal Nature. Nor (says a Cornelius Agrippa, quoted by Whitlock in his
Magnetic Lady.
Learned Author) can Man be above Woman; for, in the choice of Sexes, Christ
took Man upon him as the lowest, being he was to expiate Man's Pride in the
lowest Condescension possible.

Some are so bold as to say, Woman was not created according to God's Image; To
this the Famous Dr. Done, in his Sermon on the 28th of Matthew. v 6. in his
Volume of 80 Sermons, p. 242.
Dean of St. Paul's sufficiently and satisfactorily answers: However some Men
out of Petulancy and Wantonness of Wit, or out of extravagancy of Paradoxes,
and some Singularities, have called Women's Faculties and Abilities in question,
even in the Root thereof, the Reasonable and Immortal Soul; yet that one thing
alone has been enuf to create a Doubt (almost an Assurance in the Negative)
whether St. Ambrose his Commentaries on the Epistles of St. Paul, be truly his,
or no? Now in that Book there is a Doubt made, whether Woman was created after
God's Image? Therefore, because the Doubt is made, the Book it self is
suspected, not to have so Great, so Constant an Author, as St. Ambrose was; No
Author of Gravity, Piety, and Conversation in the Scripture, could admit that
Doubt, Whether Woman was created in the Image of God, that is, in possession of
a Reasonable and Immortal Soul? And farther, Woman, as well as Man, was made
after the Image of God in the Creation; and in the Resurrection, when we shall
rise, her Sex shall not diminish her Glory, of which she receives a very fair
Beam and Inchoation in this Text; That the purpose of God is communicated by
the Ministry of Angels to Women.

Nay, the Blessed Virgin confutes all such frivolous Argumentators with her own
Words in the Magnificat, by a pious Distinction of the Soul and Spirit; My Soul
does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

The Stagirite indeed calls (or in truth miscalls) Woman Animal occasionatum, a
Creature made upon occasion, or by chance, and says she is Mas laesus, a
maimed, imperfect Male; but, I presume, no Christian dares admit an Aristotle
in competition with the Almighty, his Philosophy speaks too dully in this
particular; for she is an Artificial Building, and from the Rafter or Plank of
a Rib was the World built; Dancy's Honor of Ladies.
for this Reason was Eve called Living; but of this more hereafter. Man cannot
be more perfect than Woman, as to the Formal Substance, because the one and the
other are comprehended under the Kind of Man; that in which they differ is not
a thing Essential.

Mulier est Vir occasionatus, say some; now if there be any Imperfection in
Woman, it must be in the Maker, or the Matter. To say it is in the former would
be Blasphemy, and to blame the latter, were to wrong the Man, because she was
taken out of him: Here let the proudest of those Misogyni answer this Author's
Dilemma. Nay, the Stagyrite goes farther, and says; they are Nature's
Errata's, continually studying Temptations, comparing Woman to Materia Prima,
because it has always a desire to change it is Form, and tho it enjoy never so
perfect a shape, it has a general propensity to all other. (This is the Sum of
his mutilated Philosophy.) The Philosopher intended by this odious Comparison,
to prove Woman as insatiable and inconstant to Man, as Materia Prima is to
Forms; but this is a most injurious similitude, and better agrees with his own,
than Woman's Temper, since he (who could not be without them for all his
Tatling, the common Fate and Destiny of such rash Inveyers) left Herina, one of
his Misses, for another to whom he erected Altars, (adoring what he so much,
seemingly, despised) to show with greater Solemnity, that he was more versatil
and unsettled in mind than Woman: thus still we find, that they who play upon
them most with their Wits, have them most in their Wishes.

Nor had Xenophilus (another of the same Profession) any better success, who
railed downright, for many years, scorned, flouted, and scoffed at them, till
at last he came into the Company of Daphnis, a Fair Maid, (as he condoles his
mishap to his Friend Demaritis) tho free before, Intactus ullis ante
Cupidinibus; was so far in Love, and captivated on a sudden, (so it seems 'twas
Love at first-sight) that he came off pitifully with his Victus sum fatcor a
Daphnide. etc. I confess I am smitten with the Love of Daphnis.

Such another Misfortune had Stratocles, Burtons Melanc. p. 461. 462.
the Physician; that Blear-eyed, old man, muco plenus, a snotty, snivelling
Fellow, as Prodromus describes him. He, a severe Woman-hater all his Lifetime;
Foeda and contumeliosa semper in Foeminas profatus; a bitter Persecutor of the
whole Sex. Humanas Aspides and Viperas appellabat; he forsware them all still
and derided them wheresoever he came, in such vile Terms that to have heard
him, and replied upon his (...), his bare word, had bin enuf to have made a Man
hate his own Mother: yet this doting Fool (pardon the Expression, because tho a
learned Man, he deserved it in this particular) was taken, at last, with the
Celestial and Divine Aspect of Nupilla, (the poor Daughter of poor Anticles, a
poor Gardner) that smirking Wench; that he shaved off his bushy Beard, painted
his Face, curled his Hair in a Glass, comasque ad Speculum disposuit, wore a
Laurel to cover his bald Pate, and besides was ready to run mad for her; tho at
last he obtained her, and when he was married (a terrible monstrous long day)
the invigorated hot-Spur fired with Love, could not endure the Flame of his
Amors till Night; He could not eat his Meat for kissing the Bride; nay, the
Meat was scarce out of his Mouth, but he would needs go to Bed, without bidding
adieu to the Guests.

O Res digna joco, and risu celebranda bimestri! Thus you see the stoutest of
them all come at last to their Alma, precor, miserere mei! Fair Mistress pity
me! I waste my Life, my Time, my Friends, my Fortune, and all to win your
single Favor, which is all the Favor I aim at: though they have been formerly
most scurrilous and abusive in their Language, they do at length invertere
stilum, and unsay what they formerly said with Shame and Confusion.

Witness also the great Bononian Doctor, Philippus Beroaldus Comment. in 6
cap.Apuleii.
who was once of Opinion, Impedire studia literarum, that Women did obstruct
Men in their Study and Contemplation: but he recanted at last, and in a solemn
manner, with true-conceived Words, did ask the World and all Women,
Forgiveness. But you shall have the Story according to his own Relation: For a
long time (says he) I lived a single Life, and could not endure Marriage, but
as a rambling Lover, Erraticus, ac Volaticus, Amator (to use his own Words) per
multiplices Amores diseurrebam. I took a Snatch where I could get it: nay more,
I railed at Marriage downright; and at a Public Auditory, when I did interpret
the sixth Satyr of Juvenal, out of Plutarch and Seneca I did heap up all the
Dicteries I could against Women, but now recant with Stesichorus, Palinodiam
cane, nec poenitet censeri in ordine Maritorum, and exhorts all Men to marry,
and especially Scholars; that as of old, so they may do now, hold the Candle,
as Martia did to Hortensius, Terentia to Tibullus, Calphurnia to Pliny,
Pudentilla to Apuleius, Legentibus and Meditantibus candelas and candelabrum
tenuerunt, who held the Candle whilst their Husbands did meditate; and so
(says he) does my Dear Camilla to me. And truly the Fly may very fitly be
their Emblem who sport thus in jest and are wounded in earnest. So long the
foolish Fly plays with the Flame,
Till her light Wings are singed with the same.
And we may well upbraid and laugh at them with this Distich: If Cupid then be
blind, how blind are ye,
That will be caught by one that cannot see.


So severe against this Sex all were not, nay many of them had a better Opinion
of them; for, they ascribed all Sciences to the Muses, all Sweetness and
Morality to the Graces, Prophetic Inspiration to the Sibyls, and in my small
revolving of Authors, I find as high Examples of Virtue in Women as Men. Mr.
Howel in his Epistles.

The Divine Plato (whose very Infancy presaged many fair Expressions of his
future Maturity) definitely professed, that among other Blessings which the
Gods had bestowed on him, he had greatest cause, of all others, to give them
Thanks for three things: 1. That they had made him a reasonable Creature, and
not a Beast. 2. A Grecian civilized, and not a Barbarian; And, 3. That he was
made a Man, and not a Woman. Yet did he sometimes ingenuously confess the
necessity of them, by winding up all his humane Felicity in these four
Particulars: So I may have, says he, 1. Eyes to read. 2. A Mind to conceive
what I read. 3. A Memory to conserve what I conceive and read; And, 4. A Woman
to serve me at my need. Then should Adversity assail me, Brathwait's Lady's
Love-Lecture. Sect. 1. pa. 423.and424.
it should not foil me; should an immerited Disgrace lie heavy on me, it should
not amate me; should my endeared Friends forsake me, by enjoying my self thus
in my own Family I should laugh at the Braves of Fortune, account Reproach my
Repute, and partake in the free Society of so sweet and select a Friend within
me, as no Child without me could perplex me. Nay, he was angry with his
Fellow-Philosopher (though otherwise a learned and brave Man) for not
sacrificing to the Graces, those gentle Female-Goddesses. Some are of Opinion
indeed, that he had perused the Mosaical Law, and bestowed much time in it
during his Residence with his Friend Phocian, in Cilicia. No marvel then if he
found there the Excellency of their Creation, with their primary Office or
Designation, being made a help for Man; and so intimate to Man, as she took her
Mold from Man, as Man his Model from Mold.



But yet the Vulgar believe, that if there be no Ill in handsome Women, at
least, there is inconvenience; that Tentation is there, tho the Sin be not. To
this Mr. Mountague, in his accomplished Woman answers: When Beauty is the
occasion of Ill, it is an Innocent that makes the Offender, and those that
complain of it do as idly, as if one should accuse the Sun for dazzling his
sight, when he looks too fixedly on that glorious Body.

Some Buffoons have been so bold as to say, that Woman is a crooked Rib, and
consequently of a crooked Temper; but that is a great mistake; for a Rib is
bending, and presupposes her pliant, not her crooked Disposition. Adam for the
loss of a Rib regained a better Self; had he not had her, he had lived an
Anachoret in Paradise.

Others of the Rabble will pretend to give you a Learned Derivation of her
Name; Woman, quasi, Woe to Man; De Lawne's Translation of Du Moulin's Logic. 12.
of Etymology, p. 70.
but Nathanael de Laune, Bachelor of Arts of Cambridge, says, Good
Etymologies in the English Tongue are for the most part taken out of Latin;
but, (says he) such as are drawn from the English are commonly absurd and
ridiculous, as Woman, Woe to Man; and Brathwait in his English Gentlewoman sings
thus; p. 287.
Are Women Woe to Men? No, they are the way
To bring them homeward when they go astray.


Another Objection against that Sex is, That one cannot love a Woman and be
wise; a Gross, Erroneous Tenet: for it is the opinion of wiser Heads, That One
cannot truly love, and not be wise; and surely this Opinion will soon be hissed
off of the Stage by Men, both young and old, or else they proclaim themselves
all Fools; since Mr. Brathwait tells you, p. 288.

Look all about you; who so young that loves not?
And who so old, a comely Feature moves not?
If you object, and bid us look up to Heaven, there are but two among the
Planets, Venus and Luna, all the rest are Males: you may as well argue that
among the Celestial Signs there are but three human Creatures, and seven brute
Animals with two inanimate, that there are more brutes in Heaven than men,
would not this be a brutish Argument. And Mr. Howel in his Epistles will tell
you, that he believes there are as many Female as Male Saints in Heaven. But
Sir, under favor, whereas you allege, that among the heavenly Planets there
are but two Females, the rest Males, it shows that Men are of a more erratick
and wandering humor than Women.

Thus Men bestow ill favored Names and Expressions (or rather Aspersions) on
lovely things, as Women; like Astronomers, that call such Stars Bulls and
Scorpions that have neither Fury nor Venom, but only Purity and Light.

But Woman was tempted first, and therefore to blame; not so: for, in the first
Sin her Fault was least, because her Temptation was greatest and strongest,
being beguiled by the subtle Serpent, but Man by a deceived or mistaken Woman.
Man was prohibited eating the forbidden Fruit, for Woman was not then created;
therefore he sinned by reason the Charge was made to him. Whitlock's Magnetic
Lady, p. 331.

Another Accusation is, That Beautiful Women are Scornful; but when we think
well of it, we shall find their Disdain proceeds rather from Conscience than
Vanity, because they cannot endure the Idolatrous pursuits of the excessive
Praises, which Men artificially offer up to surprise them. Mountague's A. W. p.
105. And they that think Women cannot be obliging understand little of the
Nature of Virtue, and are so far from a right Opinion that they are absolutely
void of all common Sense and Civility.

That Women's Piety is but tenderness of Nature, or weakness of their Wits:
those that imagine thus are not of my Opinion, says Mountague, p. 30. and
methinks they do them no less affront to deny them this Divine Quality, than if
they should take their Eyes from them, which makes the best part of the Face:
besides, Piety is oftener found as well as Pity in the tender and soft-hearted,
than in the more Rough and Robustuous Tempers.

That Timorousness restrains Women from Courtship more than Virtue; this is ill
argued; for if their Inclination be ill, Solicitation will embolden it. Indeed
there have bin Men that have possessed this Virtue upon occasion, where some
Considerations have taken away the Merit from it. Witness Alexander, who
testified some Constancy to Darius his Wives; but to show it was rather out of
Polity than Virtue, what did he not with the Amazons?

That Women are of a fearful and cowardly Temper. I cannot think that Men have
reason to call Women Fearful, because they are not hasty and unadvised; for
they that know their Temper, will confess, they have a greater disposition to
true Courage than Man; being neither cold to a degree of Insensibleness, nor
hot to a degree of Rashness. Mountag. A. W. p. 49.

Upon this Account, I suppose, it was more curiously than usefully, more
subtly than fruitfully demanded, why Woman might not as properly Woe Man, as
Man Woman? And that Arabian Resolution retrieved from the very depth of
Imagination, with much Ingenuity assoiled the Question. Woing, said the Arabian
Wit, is a Lovely Seeking; now we seek not for that we have, but what we have
not: it is more proper for the Man in Love's Quest to seek for what he has
lost, than for the Woman to seek for what she already has. The Man has lost
his Rib, and he seeks after her that has it: it is for him to seek it, who, tho
he may not have it, yet he seeks to enjoy her who has it. Brathwait, Sect. 2.
p. 442.

As to their Levity and Inconstancy, whatsoever Slanderers invent to their
disparagement in that particular, we must confess they are more firm in their
Passions than Men; at least, we learn by the Holy Writ, that on the most noble
occasion that ever offered it self, where we owe more Affection and Courage to
the Service of God; there were seen three Mary's under the Cross, and Mary
Magdalen constantly followed him to the very last, when the Disciples fell off,
after all their Protestations of never deserting him.

Women are shallow, and unfit for Knowledge; methinks this is to misjudge of
Constitutions; which, as the Physicians and Philosophers say, being more
delicate than ours, is also better disposed for it; but it may be it is an
effect of their Judicious Choice to quit freely the Vexatious musings of
Studie's wearisomness; I may say without flattering them, or pretending by this
Insinuation to the Honor of their good Graces, that they are capable of as
many Virtues as Men; and if sometimes they quit their claim, which they may lay
to them, it is rather out of Modesty or Consideration, than Unaptness. Nay,
there have not been wanting Champions in Philosophy, Law, and History, to
answer or confute Opposers, and some of them, to say truth, have not undertaken
the Cause effeminately. Plutarch counted it worth his pains to bestow a whole
Book De Virtutibus Mulierum.

But now adays such is the sad Fate of Females, they are deprived of all means
to advance themselves; so that no wonder they are not publicly Famous, being
forced to lead a retired Life at home; their Needle is their only Recreation,
or Cloistered in some Nunnery, or if married, confined to their Husband's
Humor. Men bespatter them, because their Soul is not contained in so rich a
Cabinet; they climb by Intrusion to Honor and Dignity, not by Title or Merit,
not by Rule or Divine Command, but by Strength and might. The best Land
incultivated bears nothing but Briers and Thorns, where Art and Labor might
bring forth Lillies and Tulips; it is that that is often wanting to their good
Inclinations and Desires, when Tyranny, or some other misfortune bars them the
possession of these fair Qualities, of which Nature has given them a Capacity.

The Oracle of Apollo declared Socrates the wisest of men; and he confessed,
that his Diotinia taught him the Wisdom and Prudence which the Gods themselves
judged incomparable. It was no small advantage to this Woman to instruct this
Philosopher, who might prescribe Rules to all men for Life and manners. The
Emperor Justinian, the great Civilian, would not judge of any matter till he
had first given an account of it to his Wife. And Plutarch writes, that the
Roman Lady Porcia endeared Cethegus so far, that he enterpriz'd no Design, nor
managed any Affair without her Advice and Approbation. Priscilla was so
knowing, that she instructed Apollo, a Bishop, and Aspatia was judged worthy to
teach Pericles. Nay, whole Nations, as well as single Persons, have honored
them for their Knowledge. The Scythian Women judged of Public matters, and
their Verdict was of great Esteem.

Our Ancient Gauls divided with them the Glory of Peace and War, reserving only
the Active part of Arms unto themselves, and leaving the Women the
Establishment of Laws, and Preservation of Commonwealths; that was not to be
done by Ignorant Persons; and one may judge in what esteem our Ancestors held
them, since they allotted to the Men only the Exercise of the Body, and to the
Women the Abilities of the Mind.

But Women are Deceitful, and can command Tears at will: Admit they can, and do
frequently weep, it is a great Argument of their Tenderness and Pity; for a
Woman, if ever she weeps, she thinks her self obliged so to do, because all the
World is not so good as she her self.

It was a snarling Speech of a Cynique, when passing by a Tree whereon a Maid
had hanged her self, wished that all Trees might bear such Fruit; but his very
name implies an Answer; it was a Dog-like and currish Expression.

The odd opinion that the Jews and Turks have of Women, that they are of an
Inferior Creation to Man, and therefore exclude them, the one from their
Synagogues, and the other from their Mosquets, is in my Judgment not only
Partial, but Profane; for the Image of the Creator shines as much in the one
as in the other. Howel's Letters.

Some will deprive Women of their Privilege of going abroad; and I know what
Philosopher he was that would have them appear but thrice abroad all their
Lifetime; at their Christening, Marriage, and Burial; but the reason was not
their Wantonness, but his own Lust, that he might have the better opportunity
to go the oftener to them at home in private; and in truth Jealousy (which was
one cause of it) is a fear which discovers not so much, as it confesses, the
Merit of our Enemy. Yet I am not so Laconically severe (says Burton in his
Melancholy) or Stoically Rigid, as to debarr Women of all Society and Meetings,
they may improve them by a Civil and Moral Use, to their Advantage and Benefit,
they may Converse with a modest and becoming Freedom.

The Latin Tongue styles a Friend Amicus, a Sweetheart Amica; and in this that
Language is Injurious to that Sex, as if it were incapable of any kind of
Familiarity or Friendship, but in way of Marriage. Fuller in his Holy State;
but daily Experience confutes this Argument, and therefore it is not worthy an
Answer.

But the Herculean and Irrefragable Argument is still to come; viz. That Women
are subject to paint, which is a kind of Self-Adultery, a Metamorphosis of
God's Works, etc. But one of the best Wits of our Nation has penned a Treatise
in Defense of it, called Auxiliary or Artificial Beauty; who says, It is but a
Fixation of Nature's Inconstancy, and is no more Adulterating of God's Works,
than to die Wool, Linen, or Silk, out of their Native Simplicity, or to wash
the Scurf and Filth off, which rises naturally from our Bodies by Sweating or
Evaporation.

It is no more the Adulterating of Nature, than the applying of sweet Smells
and Scents to our Clothes, Bodies, or Breath; not only as a Delight, but Remedy
to the Native Rankness or Offensiveness which some Persons are subject to, both
in their Breath and Constitution, which not to Cure, or alter by Art, is to
condemn such Persons (otherwise not ill Company) to Solitude, by reason of
those very Savours, which make them fitter for Cells than Society.

We cannot, (that is, we may not) make one hair of our Head white or black,
Matthew 5.36. So Men may not, by the same reason, that are Mad, be restrained
from their Extravagancies, because God has afflicted them; so Sick men must
bid Defiance to all Physicians, accounting them as so many bold Giants, or
Monsters, who daily seek to fight against Heaven by their Rebellious Drugs and
Doses, prescribed in strange affected Terms of Art, and ill-scribled Bills,
which seem to be as so many Charms or Spells. So Lame Men may not either use
Crutches to supply the weakness of their Legs, or to shore up the tottering
frame of their Body. Any one undoubtedly may lawfully redeem himself from the
uncomeliness of such an untimely Accident, by dying his Hair, or by using a
Perruque suitable to his greener Years, without interfering with our Savior's
meaning, that we cannot make one Hair white or black, which only shows the
unchangeable Bounds and Principles of Nature, as to God's Fixation and
Providence in all things; but not to forbid the Ingenious Operations of Humane
Art and Invention, to which the Works of God in Nature are subjected, so far as
they are managed within the Limits of Moral Intention and Religious Ends.

It seems to me no better than a strait-lac'd Superstition, which thus pinches
God's Bounty, and a Christian's Liberty, which makes Christianinity such a
Captive to such unnecessary Rigors and pedling Severities, as if it were never
in a due Posture and Habit, till its Nails be pared to the quick, and its Hair
shaven to the Skull. To be Godly, it is not necessary to be ugly; nor does
Deformity add any thing to our Devotion, God's Mercy to our Souls, denies us
not due care and consideration of our Bodies.

After these Methods of Holy Ill-husbandry, we must let our Fields and Gardens
be oppressed under the Usurpation of Brambles, and the Tyranny of all evil
Weeds, which are the Products of Providence, as well as the best Herbs and
Flowers; and you may not by the invention of Artificial Day, supply the Sun's
absence with Candle or Torch-light, nor dispell the horror of that Darkness
which Providence brings over the face of the Earth in the Night. You may as
well discommend a Glass-Eye, when the Natural one is out. Surely Facemending is
no sin, nor to help a withered Autumnal Complexion no Crime; nor to fill up the
Ranks and rotted Files of the Teeth with Ivory Adjutants and Lieutenants.

The Sarcasm which was used by a Witty and Eloquent Preacher, whom we both
heard at Oxford (meaning the two Ladies disputing about Painting, in the
Treatise of Auxiliary Beauty) who speaking against the abuse of Women's
Ornaments, instanced in Jezabel's being eaten with Dogs, as showing (says he)
that a Woman so polished and painted was not fit to be Man's meat; which
Expression had more of Wit and Jest in it, than Weight or Earnest, as if the
Heart received sinful Infection by any Color or Tincture put to the Face, more
than it does moral defilement by any thing that enters into the Mouth.

To deprive Women of Additional Arts, is to reduce them from the Politure and
Improvement of after Times and Experience, to their first Caves and Cottages in
primitive Skins and Aprons.

St. Jerome, writing to Gaudensius about the Clothes of young Pacutula, seems to
excuse the Curiosity of Women, in very remarkable terms. Their Sex (says he)
is curious in Ornaments, and studies naturally the Sumptuousness of Clothes;
insomuch as I have seen many chaste Ladies that dress themselves very costly,
without having any aim in their Designs, but their particular Contentment, by a
certain harmless Complacency or Satisfaction. This Inclination is so natural to
them, as heretofore many Ladies did intomb their Ornaments with themselves, to
carry into the other World that which they had acknowledged so much in this.

It is true, there is a Story, That Caesar seeing his Daughter Julia Augusta
too curiously brave, considered her a great while without gracing her with a
Word, expressing his Dissatisfaction by his Silence. The next day seeing her
more modestly dressed, he told her with a smiling Countenance, that that Habit
better became the Daughter of Augustus: but the Reply of this Princess was not
less considerable than the Admonishment of the Emperor; I was dressed
Yesterday (said she) for my Husband, but to Day for my Father.

But they will object, That Painting is an adventitious Stealth, a bastardly
kind of Adoption.

You never are jealous of any Scarlet, Crimson, or purple Tincture in your
Clothes, wherein you please your selves more than in deader colors: they are
but the simple Juice or Extract of some innocent Herb, Leaf, Flower or Root, of
which no other use in Physic or Food can be made.

Beauty is a great Blessing among those little momentary ones which our Dust is
capable of; and artificial helps of Beauty carry with them their own Antidote,
while they are Monitors of our Wants and Infirmities, which like the swallowing
down the Stone keeps us from surfeiting of the Cherries we eat: and the
remedying of Deformity, by artificial Applications can be no more a Temptation
to Pride than the use of Crutches and Spectacles to those that are lame and
dim-sighted. We read no where in Scripture that the Beauty and Bravery of
Colors is either forbidden or reproved, unless unseasonably worn, when God
calls for Sackcloth and Blackness of Face. Lydia, a Seller of Purple, Acts
16.14. (whose Dye or finer Tincture was of more worth than the Substance it
self) yet is not forbidden, when she was converted to be a Christian, either to
dye or sell any more of that rich Color. Against this honest Liberty of
Painting nothing wars so much as Prejudice, and a kind of Wontedness to think
the contrary.

Mr. Downam, in his Warfare, c. 14. calls Painting the Devil's Invention, a
Sin, not only in the Abuse but the very Use, etc. He brings Tertullian arguing
against it as the Devil's counterfeiting and mocking of God, etc. And he quotes
St. Cyprian, telling the veiled Virgins, that the Devil, by these Arts, does
but distort and poison what God has made handsome and wholesome. He might have
added many more, as I find in our English Authors, who produce the Authority of
St. Ambrose, St. Austin, St. Chrysostom, and St. Jerome, against all additional
Beauty.

No Soul was more shaken than I was (says the Author of Auxiliary Beauty) in
the minority of my Judgment, when I had more of Traditional Superstition than
of Judicious Religion, and valued more the number of men's Names than the weight
of their Reasons. And now out of the Nonage and Minority which kept me in the
Wardship and Awe of Men's Names and Number, I considered that these alone
signified no more to make up any Reason, or to prove any Sin, (in point of
Conscience) than so many Counters can make up a Sum, which have no Figures
before them.

Good and Great Men are not set beyond Mistakes.

They might Decree possibly these Helps in some Women, not as absolutely evil,
but as inexpedient and needless in those times of Persecution, when they were
to be married to the Faggot and Flames. They do not oppose things of this
Nature argumentatively so much as oratoriously; not denying the use of them to
some Persons, in some Cases, at some times, but the Abuse of them. Besides,
their greatest strictness seems to have been to Votaries or reserved Virgins.

How did many great Ministers inveigh against Tobacco in the Pulpit, before
they generally fell to taking it themselves, fancying at last, that they never
had more devout Meditations or sharp Inventions, than those which were begun by
the Midwifery of a Pipe of Tobacco. Their Report seems fitted to the Polity and
Bent of those Times. Mr. Downam did not distinguish between the thing done, and
the End, or Mind of those that do it; as if the sober Relief of a palid
Infirmity, or the modest Study of outward Decency, were the same thing with
Pride, Levity, and Wantonness. At the same rate he may inveigh against
quenching one's Thirst, or drinking to Cheerfulness, because of the sordid
consequences of Drinking, Riot, and Debauchery.

His other heap of Arguments are only assertory, not prefatory; he makes it not
good, that it was an absolute Sin in the use, but neither by any Proofs, or
pregnant Reason, or God's Word.

But all are lewd and wanton that use it, says he; and this is as harsh as
rash for him to maintain: and how could he in Charity do it, unless he had
known their Hearts that use those Arts. Thus, like a mad Man with a Sword, he
lays about, and smites all that come near him. Very few examine the Marrow and
Inside of things, but take them upon the credit of customary Opinion. Few Men's
Judgments are so died in Grain, but they will fade and discolor, being for the
most part dipped by vulgar Easiness in common Opinion.

To conclude this Particular, all is but verbal painting or oral coloring that
is used against Artificial Handsomness, or Auxiliary Beauty; or like the
rattling of Hail upon Tiles, which neither wets with Moisture, nor pierces with
it is Strokes and Noise. But that which I wonder at is, that Men should rail
against Women for that which they themselves are more criminally guilty:
witness Hortensius the Roman Orator, who spent half the day in beholding and
dressing himself in a Glass instead of studying his Orations; and Stratocles
the Physician, that painted his withered Face and adorned himself to court his
Mistress.

But truly I cannot yet see, but that in the height of religious Severity, it
may be put among those venial Vanities of Humane Life, of which no stricter
account in point of Morality need to be given or exacted, but only that Divine
Intelligence by which God in innocent Freedom, as a Father to a Child, gives us
leave to adorn and please our selves without any of his Displeasure.

But admit, when all is said and done, that Women when they prove bad are a
sort of the vilest Creatures imaginable, yet still the same Reason gives it,
Corruption optimi est pessima, and this also will tend to their Advantage in
despite of all Opposers.

Thus they seek to murder Women's Reputation whenas they destroy their own; for,
the Calumniator is but another Pigmalion, the Artisan of his own Misfortune,
and indeed, is a Murderer, Tres uno perimit ictu; he kills three at once, viz.
Himself, the Party that hears it, and the Person from whom he detracts. But,
how truly do these Females trace the Method of Charity, to suffer all these
opprobrious Scoffs and Scurrilities without reaction! Alas! they know that if
Reason cannot curb their lashing Tongues, their Dispraises will, after the
manner of the Tartar's Bow, shoot back upon themselves from whence they came.
They do but with the Wolves of Syria, bark against the M^^n, which is out of
their reach; for their Virtues sit above Men's Calumnes; their Excellency is
such, that it need, not the reedy under-proping of (...) Opinion: they
understand, (...) ^^^^ect will kill an Injury (...) Revenge. Besides, they may
ever expect weak blows where they find strong words. Woman scorns to flame at
every fiery Tongue's Puff; for the Crackers of the Brain and Squibs of the
Tongue will dye alone, if not revived, and the best way to have them forgot by
others, is first to forget them her self. She has a Spirit planted above petty
wrongs: the Temper of her Genius is too Stoical to be sensible in the least of
the weak Assaults of that Cowardly Pigmy, Detraction, whom handsomely to
overcome, is to scorn.

By such Obloquies Men think to debase Women, and all to as little purpose as
to cast Chains into the Sea, or to tie the Ocean with Fetters; and these
frequent Dispraises at best are but the Faults of uncharitable Men; But alas!
she that will question every disgraceful word that is spoken of her, shall have
few Friends, little Wit, and much Trouble. Let them consider, that if there
were neither Malice, nor Enemies in the World, there are few Things so sure, or
so true that cannot be taken diverse ways; and if we examine well all our
Actions, it seems that they are all subject to Interpretation and Dispute.
Mount. A.W. p. 27.

It is not to any Man given absolutely to be absolute; and Fools are the
greater number among them; for Wisemen are like Timber Trees in a Wood, here
and there one. Feltham's Resolves.

Thus Men puff up themselves as big as Pride and Vanity can make them, with a
conceit of their own Meritoriousness; tho it be a sordid thing for a man to be
the Herald of his own Praise: But it may be said of these Airmongers as it is
of the Cameleon, which is Nil praeter Pulmones, Nothing but Lungs, or of the
Nightingale, Vox and praeterea nihil, nothing but Voice; so that as it was said
of Trajan the Emperor, when he vaunted his Parthian Trophies before the Gods;
they may, he said, as justly to be (...), more respecting a sound of Words,
than a sound Matter.

But when all is done, since men assume so much to themselves and derogate so
much from Females; Let any Man rake all the History in the World and find out
among them if he can, such a coveteous Midas as to wish the very Meat he eat to
be turned into Gold, or such a passionate and incompatible Revenger as with
Silla never to forgive, nor forget the Injury done him by an Offender; or such
a marrow-eating, envious Tetter, as Ctesiphon, who macerated himself in the
Prosperity of another? or such an Idolater of Honor as Themistocles, who could
not sleep for the Ambition he bare to the Triumphs of Miltiades? or such a
Glutton as Cambles, who devoured his own Wife in Bed, and the next morning,
finding one of her Hands in his Mouth, swallowed it? of such a Gulo as
Vitellius or Heliogabalus; the former whereof had served up at one Feast 2000
Fishes and 7000 Birds; the latter had his Table covered at a single Supper with
6000 Ostriches? or such a Gourmand as Maximinus, who devoured every day 40
pound of Flesh, and drank five Gallons of Wine? or such a Catamite as the
Bithynian, who was a Woman for all Men, and a Man for all Women, an equal
Agent, or Patient to satisfy Nature? or such a lazy Lollard as Margites, who
never dig'd, plowed, sowed, nor ever did any good all his Life long, but slept
out his time in a sluggish posture and useless manner? or such a Ludus Amoris,
a Cupid's Whirlegig (as Juno calls Jupiter in Lucian) who was so often changed
into Shapes; for Europa into a Buck, for Aegina into a Flame, for Danae into a
Shower of Gold; for Astraea into an Eagle, for Leda into a Swan; for Antiope
into a Satyr; for Mnemosine into a Shepherd, for Dois into a Serpent; for
Calisto into a Wood-Nymph, or Nun? or such an Apostate as Julian, or Atheist as
Lucian, who, tho rare Wits, and their Images were to be had in esteem for their
Ingenuity, yet were they to be spurned at for their Impiety? Thus you see,
notwithstanding all this, how envious Men seek to envenom the Names of Women,
and inveigh against them in such terms as you have heard, with many other as
groundless, as bitter Sarcasms, that a Beast has Wit enu^ to apprehend the
heinousness of such obloquies; so scandalous, that I cannot forbear crying out
with the Poet Horresco referens; I blush at and abhor the farther Repetition of
them, and scorn to sully my Paper with such black scandals, or teach my Pen
such undutiful Language. And tho this be more than Statute madness in Men, yet
such Carpers ubique stabulant; but such they are, and only such who have
vomited out of their Souls all Remnants of Goodness, and who can expect a sweet
Breath out of such foul Stomachs; and their very Reasons, if any, are but the
scum of base Malice, the Fruits of Choler adust, and the Evaporations of a
Vindicative Spirit; and yet notwithstanding all these high Provocations,
ungentile and gross Affronts, methinks I hear that undaunted and deserving Sex
acquiesce patiently with this Requiem, and conclude, Their Praise or Dispraise
is to me alike;
The One does not stroke me, nor the other strike.


In Examination of the whole Sex, we shall find, that all makes more for their
Honor than most men have acknowledged. Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and several
others, have commended them: and to complete all, let us hear what the snarling
Cynick Diogenes says of them, who was composed of nothing but Gibe and Jest. He
calls proper Women Queens; Quod facerent Homines quod praeciperent, because men
were so obedient to their Commands; so that it appears before these late years
of Phrenzy, there was a time (and pitty'tis so good a time had ever Wings to
fly away) when due Reverence was paid unto that Sex, whose just praise is a
Task will dull the very Edge of Rhetoric, and I fear I shall sully it in the
delivery. Here is a Field for an Orator to use Eloquence in. Here is a Subject
fit to put Phancie upon the Rack, and torture Wits, as Agues do Physicians. But
as Dr. Brown, in his Religio Medier, has it, where there is an obscurity too
dark for Reason, it is good to sit down with a Description or Adumbration. A
purer Substance is defined by a combined Heap of Negatives. Ask what a Spirit
is! The reply will be it has no Matter. No other ways can I define a Virtuous
Woman; she is not as others are; what seems perfection in others it is her
perfection to want. All the World is but her Periphrasis. She is the best
Creature that ever the Universe brought forth from the Birth of Time till now.
A Person in whom the Sun and Abridgment of all Perfection meet, like Paralels
in their proper Center. She is a pretty piece of Flesh and Blood printed in a
fair Letter and neatly bound up; no Man that is Master of Reason, but would be
glad to take her with her Errata's, if any. She is a heap of Wonders able to
amuse the clearst Understanding.

-- Qua sparguntur in omnes
Intermixta fluunt, and qua divisa beatos
Efficient, collecta tenes -- Claudian. I. Panegir.
She was born Fair and Good, to show, that Nature is no Stepmother to that
Sex, how much soever Men (Sharp-witted only in evil speaking) seek to disgrace
them.

When Providence first cleav'd our Sire, and made Eve out of Adam, she was
created his Equal, only the difference was in the Sex, otherwise they both were
Man. Her Body is more admirable and Beautiful than Man's, fuller of Curiosities
and Nature's Wonders, both for Conceptian, and fostering the producted Birth.
And can we think God would put a worse Soul into a better Body? Nay, if the
Philosophical Maxim holds good, That the Temperature of the Soul follows that
of the Body, we must necessarily conclude, that as her outward, so her inward
Affections must be more purely refined. When Man was created, it is said, God
made Man, but when Woman, He Built her; as if he had been about a Frame of
Rarer Rooms, and more exact Composition. Finxit Hominem, Aedificat Costam; so
that Man was but Figmentum, Woman Aedificum. If Place can privilege her, we
find her built in Paradise; She was formed on that Holy Ground where Angels
resorted, whenas poor man was made in the open Field with four-footed Beasts.
Thus the Place, Name, and Matter of which she was formed is more Noble than
Man's. It Is certain, they are by Constitution colder than the Boiling Man, and
so by consequence more Temperate; it is Heat transports Man to Immoderation and
Fury; it is that which hurries him to a Savage and Libidinous Violence. When a
Woman grows bold and daring, we say she is Impudent, and too like Man; in our
selves we magnify what we condemn in her; Is not this Injustice? Every Man is
so much the better, by how much he comes nearer God. Man in nothing is more
like God, than in being Merciful, yet Woman is far more Merciful than Man, it
being a Sex wherein Pity and Compassion has dispersed far brighter Rays. God
is said to be Love; and Women exceed every where for transcending in that
Quality. It Is Injustice then in Men to pass Sentence upon them before they be
heard. They have ever held the Parliament, and enacted what they will, not
permitting them to speak; therefore in this Case let the Divine Seneca be their
Advocate, and speak for them; Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet statuerit haud aequus fuerit.


Thus far Feltham in his Resolves; With little Alteration.

From the Order and Method of the Wise Architect of the Universe, we may
infallibly conclude Woman the more Excellent Creature.

Incorrupt things were first made, as Stars, Planets the Chrystalline and
Primum Mobile; then Minerals, then Plants and Trees, then Sensitives, then Man,
and last of all Woman, as being the Perfection of the Creation. Woman was last
in Humanity and first in Divinity. The Blessed Virgin brought forth the Blessed
Babe, that made Man Blessed, without the help of Man. Jacob got his Blessing by
his prudent Mother. When our Savior arose he appeared first to a Woman. In the
Sacred Pages we find it recorded, that the Male Children were slain, the Female
saved.

Conelius Agrippa the Woman's professed Champion, and their Attorney General,
(quoted by Whitlock in his Magnetic Lady) He begins his Argument from the very
name Chauva signifying Life; and Adam, but Earth (tho the prating Rabbis sport
another derivation from Chiva to tattle.) from the order of the Creation he
Argues her Excellency and Perfection. She was created last of all, and so
admitted into this World, tanquam Regina in Regiam paratam, like a Queen into a
ready furnished Palace. Besides, her Matter was not of so low an extract as
Adam's, but of sinished Man (whose prime material was ruder Dust) was this rare
piece made; hence it is, that there is a greater Eminency of Beauty generally
in that Sex than in the other; so as what Beauty the World it self contains in
severals, seems to be contracted in this Model, that all Creatures might
reverence and admire this complete piece. Nor is it fabulous, that Spirits
themselves have bin enamored with some Women: We read their Beauty spoken of
throughout the whole Book of Truth, with more signal Observations than that of
Man. She is the Consummation and Perfection of Man. Idcirco illam omnis Homo
amet necesseest, etc. Who therefore can but love that Sex? Who ever hates it
must needs be a Stranger to Virtue, Courtesy and Humanity it self. Can any
Lady forbear giving this their Attorney a Fee? Nay, one of our own Nation says
in plain homely terms, He that loves not a Woman sucked a Sow; and questionless
he must be either Barbarous or Divine, that is Proof against the Charms of
Female Beauty. What Heresies or Errors were ever broached by Women? Christ was
betrayed, abused, and crucified by Men, not Women; for Pilat's Wife did use all
possible means to dissuade her Husband from pronouncing so Unjust a Sentence,
as that was against our Savior. By his very Peter denied, only the Women
accompanied him to the Cross: and no small part of the Schole-men affirm,
Ecclesiam tune non nisi apud solam Mulierem, puta Virginem Mariam mansisse;
That the Church of Christ remained then only in the Virgin Mary: Nay, Women
were the first Trumpets to publish the Resurrection.

If any should out, of Aristotle, allege, That Men are more Noble, Wise, Vali-
etc. then Women; I demand what Men of the most Eminent has not this Sex
outdone? but we will produce Aristotle against Aristotle, and answer the
Stagirite by the Stagirite, tho their professed Enemy, and this his own
Argument. That kind or Rank of Creatures, whose best is better than the best of
any other; even that kind it self is better than any other kind; but such is
the Virgin Mary (the best of that Sex) above St. John Baptist, the greatest of
the other Sex, (according to our Savior's own Argument, Matthew. 11) so that but
naming the Virgin Mary, the Cause is carried for that Sex against the Divinity
of the Male. To go on; How many do we read in Scripture condemned to Eternal
Torments, but not Women? whence came the first original of all Vices? Did not
in Adam all die? not in Eve. Did not his eldest Son Cain first open Hell Gates?
Lamech was the first Digamist; Noah the first surpised with Wine. Run through
all the Virtues, you will find the Women so Famous, that some of them excelled
Men; for Virginity, the Virgin Mary; for Prophecy, Moses's Sister; for
Constancy in the Faith, Esther, Ruth, Mary Magdalen, that believed when the
Apostles doubted; and for Martyrdom that rare example Maccab. 2. 6. Have not
Women in Martyrdom equaled the number of Men? and to complete the History of
that Truth, Ne cui dubium Mulieris ea omnia posse quoe Viri, That Women
doubntless can and have done whatsoever Man has done. In Priesthood was not
Melissa famous among the Heathens themselves for a Priesters Mera to Venus,
Iphigenia to Diana; and in nostra Religione licet mulieribus Sacerdotii
funtione interdictum sit, scimus iamen Historiis prodictum Mulierem aliquando
mentito Sexu ad Summi Pontificatus apicem conscendisse; (I give you his own
Words, because Agrippa (tho a Catholic,) is so ingenious as to confess a Pope
Joan) Even in our own Religion tho we forbid Women the Priesthood, yet History
assures us of a Woman that arrived at the Popedom, and she ruled for two
years or thereabout, as well as the best of them. Thus, says he, I have proved
the preeminence of Women by their Name, Order of Creation, Nature, Religion,
etc. Ne debitas illis Lauds, etc. lest I should hide a Talent entrusted to me,
if I should conceal what Truth has said for them, p. 334. and 335. Whitlock's
Mag. Lady.

Women are made of purer plastical Ingredients; there went more refined Stuff
to their Composition than that of Man: for, if Man be of never so fine a Paste,
if he wash his hands in the clearest Water, in several Basins, never so often,
yet he will leave some foulness and feculencie behind; but a Woman can wash and
leave the Water at last as clear, fair, and limpid as when it came from the
Source or Fountain 0 it self in few times washing. As to their Modesty, take
this Example; The Daughter of Pythagoras being demanded what most shamed her to
discourse of, made Answer, (...), Those Parts which made her Woman. And if that
of Justin be true, Vera mulierum ornamenta Pudicitiam esse, non Vestes, That
Modesty is the best Apparel of a Woman; They have the best Ornaments: Heylin.
So modest they are when alive, that they cannot enter into Company without a
Maiden-blush; nay, it is proverbially called a Maiden-blush, as if they only had
a Patent to dye that Color, tinctured like a fair Morning in May. And if we
may believe Pliny the great Naturalist, one of Nature's Prothonotaries (who had
stripped her to her Smock, and lay with her as familiarly as a Wife) they retain
this Grace of Modesty even after Death; for if a Woman be drowned, she swims
with her Back-parts upward, the Man with his Belly; but such Cases as these
must not be argued in the Common Pleas. Nay, the Woman swims, the Man sinks, if
they fall into the Water. Man's Head, his greatest Ornament, is sometimes
deformed with Baldness; but on the contrary, Women retain their Ornamental
Tresses to the last.

Fonseca is of Opinion, and so am I, that there is something in Woman beyond
all humane Delight; a magnetic Virtue, a charming Quality, and powerful Motive
to incite Love and Affection. Nay, Alexander being much in Love with Apelles,
as one highly rapt with the Exquisiteness of his Art, proposed him that Model
for his Task, which he of all others affected most, commanding him on a time to
paint Campaspe, a Beautiful Woman, naked: which Apelles having done, the
Picture wrought such an Impression on his Affection, that Apelles fell in Love
with her; and Alexander perceiving it, bestowed it upon him. If such impressive
motives of Affection draw Life from a Picture, what may be conceived by the
Substance. To illustrate this, there is a Story recorded in the Lives of the
Fathers, concerning a Child who was educated in a Desert from his Infancy, by
an old Eremite. Being come to Man's Estate, he accidentally spied two Comely
Women, wandering in the Woods, and inquired of the Aged Father (having never
seen such Amiable Creatures before in his Life) what they were? The Eremite
told him they were Fairies: (here note by the way, tho Eremites pretend never
so much Religion and Sanctimony, they can now and then swallow a Lie without
choking, as well as vicious Persons) After some tract of Time, being in
Discourse, the Old Man demanded of him which was the pleasantest and most
delectable Sight that ever he saw in his Life? He readily replied, the two
Fairies he saw in the Woods; so that indubitably there is in a fair and
beautiful Woman a magnetic and natural, inbred, attractive Faculty, which
moves Man to love her.

But we need not have rambled in the Desert to prove this, since we have a
Confirmation thereof at home; An Ambassador, who being to be entertained by
Queen Elizabeth (where the greatest State was still observed) first passed
through a Lane of the Guard in their rich Coats, next through the
Gentlemen-Pentioners, and so through all the greater Officers, the Lords,
Earls, and Counselors. The Queen sat there in State at the upper end of a long
Gallery, which when the Ambassador was to enter, the great Ladies, of either
side, richly attired, were placed; through the midst of whom, as he passed
along, he, so amazed at the State, or admiring at their Beauties, cast his Eyes
first on one side, then on the other, and that not without some Pause, as if he
had been to take a particular Survey of all their Features; but by degrees
coming toward the Queen, who sat like Diana among her Nymphs, or Ariadne with
her Crown of Stars, instated above the lesser Lights, to give him
Entertainment; and observing his Eye still to wander, thus bespake him; Averte
oculos, ne videas vanitatem, to whom he suddenly replied, Imo potius mirabilia
opera Dei, such wonderful Fabrics are Women. And this confirms Plato's
Opinion, That Beauty is a humane Splendour amiable in it is own Nature, that has
the power to ravish the Mind with the Eyes. And Mr. Mountague says, Those that
adore or despise Beauty offer too much or too little to the Image of God; for
we as seldom find Beauty without Virtue, as Ugliness without Mischief: and
heretofore deformed Ministers have been rejected from the Temple; let us not
therefore believe ill of Beauty, since God himself has thought it necessary
for those that approach his Altars.

Heliogabalus from a Priest of the Sun rose to be Emperor of all the World for
his Beauty; and the Face of Scipio the African subdued many a Barbarous Nation,
without so much as drawing his Sword.

In the expression of the Affection, which requires a great measure of
Discretion, we shall find a more rare Temperature in the Feminine Sex; they can
shadow their reserved Love with a Discreet Secrecy, and an absolute Command
(of what Soveranizeth most in the contrary Sex) declining the seeming grounds
of Jealousy: or if they fall in Love, as they are subject to Passions as well
as we, so Modest they are, that they will suffer, rather than discover their
Affection: witness that fair Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to Edward the Fourth, who
being Enamored with Henry the Seventh, that noble young Prince, and newly
saluted King, she brake forth into this passionate Speech: O that I were worthy
of that comely Prince! but my Father being dead, I want Friends to motion such
a Matter. What shall I say? I am all alone, and dare not open my Mind to any.
What if I acquaint my Mother? Bashfulness forbids. What if some Lords? Audacity
wants. O that I might but conser with him! Perhaps in Discourse I might let
slip such a Word as might discover my Intention. Modesty in Women is like the
Angels flaming Sword, to keep vile Men out of the Paradise of their Chastity.

The four Parts of the World had beenlost for want of a certain Name, and
utterly unknown but for Women.

What were the 9 Muses? The 3 Graces? The 12 Sibils? Minerva the Goddess of
Wisdom? and the watchful Hesperides; were they not all Women,

We may from Birds derive Woman's Prerogative. The Eagle is Queen of the winged
Inhabitants of the Air; the Phoenix but one, and she a Female too; but the
killing Basilisk is accounted King of Serpents.

Next consider her under the Notion of a Wife, and you shall find more Argument
of Praise and Admiration than the contrary, if the most Refined Wits of the
Times are in the right, some of whose Opinions shall be insisted on; for should
they be all amassed and heaped up, the Contents would be too large for one
Volume: and first of Marriage it self.

Marriage, St. Paul. Heb. 13.4. Smith's preparative to Marriage
(says the learned Apostle of the Gentiles) is Honorable; and well he might;
for God Honored it himself. It is Honorable (as one of our own Divines has
it) for the Author, Time and Place. For the Author, because it was ordained by
himself, whereas all other Ordinances were appointed of God by the Hands of
Men, or Angels. For Time; for it was the first ordinance God instituted, and
that in the state of Innocence, before Man had any other calling, he was called
to be a Husband; therefore it has the Honor of Antiquity, because it was the
first, and consequently the most Ancient Ordinance.

For Place; Marriage was instituted in Paradise, in the happiest Place and so
has the honor of Place above all other Ordinances.

As God the Father Honored Marriage, so did the Son, not only by his Birth,
but Miracles; for the first Miracle the blested Jesus wrought, was at a
Marriage in Canaan, John 2. 6. where he turned Water into Wine. Nay farther, he
honored it with his Praises, Matt. 22. 2. for he compares the Kingdom of God
to a wedding, Verse 11. and Holiness to a wedding Garment; Cantic. 5. 8. Nay,
he himself is said to be wedded; all which premises, if seriously and duly
considered, do sufficiently and undeniably evince the Honor of a Marriage
State, let the single chatter what they please.

Next, as to the Wife, take her ensuing Character. A Wife is a Man's best
Moveable; Sr. Tho. Overbury's Wife.
one that is more than a Friend, less then Trouble; a Scions incorporate with
the Stock, and equal with him in the Yoke. Nothing pleases her that
displeases him; She is Relative in all, and he without her is but half
himself; she frames her Nature to his howsoever. The Hyacinth follows not the
Sun more willingly. Stubborness and obstinacy are Flowers, that grow not in her
Garden. A Husband without out her is a misery in Man's Apparel; and if Age has
snow'd gray Hairs upon his Head, She is both a Staff and a Chair, to base and
support him. She is his absent Hands, Eyes, Ears, and Mouth, his present, and
absent all.

The good Wife never crosses her Husband in the Spring tide of his Anger;
Fuller's Holy State.
but stay's till it be ebbing-VVater. Her Carriage is so Modest, that she
disheartens Wantons, not only to take, but even besiege her Chastity. Her
Children, tho many in number, are none in noise; steering them with a look,
whither she lists. A great and eminent: Divine of this Modern Age, George
Wicelius.
a Man searcely to be paralleled for Sanctimony, by twenty six Arguments
commends Marriage, as a thing necessary for, most laudable and fit to be
embraced by all sorts of Persons: and is persuaded withal, that no man can
live and dye religiously, as he ought to do, without a Wife. These are his
very words; Persuasus sum neminem posse, neque pie vivere, neque been mori
citra Vxorem. Let all Stale Batchelers that seem to boast of their Resolution
against, and Aversion to so sacred an Ordinance as Matrimony, ruminate on this;
He is an Enemy to the Kingdom of Heaven, injurious to himself, destructive to
the World, an Apostate to Nature, and a Rebel against Heaven and Earth, who
declines Marriage and leads a single Life.

The Hebrews have a saying; He is not a Man, that has not a Woman, i.e. a
Wife: for tho Man alone may possibly be good, Secker's wedding Ring.
yet it is not good for Man to be alone. As for the Catholics, who exact the
Virgin state so extravagantly; it is like him that commended Fasting, when he
was cloyed with Feasting. Where there is no Generation, there can be no
Regeneration; the Church could not be expatiated without Marriage. It was a
Question that one put to him, who said, Marriage Peoples the Earth, but
Virginity Heaven; How can the Heaven be full, if the Earth be empty? VVilt thou
condemn all for the Faults of one? as if it were true Logic, because some are
Evil, therefore none are good. To blast thy Helper is to blame thy Maker. Is a
solitary as good as a married Life? then can one string make as good Harmony as
a Consort. God commanded Abraham to do as his good Wife Sarah commanded. A
happy Couple! He joying in her, she joying in her self; but in her self,
because she enjoyed him. Both increased their Riches to each other, each making
one Life, double, because they make a double Life, one; where desire never
wanted Satisfaction, nor Satisfaction bred Satiety: He ruling, because she
would obey; or rather, because she would obey, he id. ib. therein ruling.
Nature when a Female was first born, vowed her a Woman; and as she made her the
Child of a Mother, so to do her best to be Mother of a Child. She gave her
Beauty to move Love, Wit to know Love, and an excellent Body to reward Love.

James de Voragine, upon those words in the second of Genesis, Adjutorium
simile, etc. by an honest Jury of Arguments proves the excellency of Marriage
above Virginity; as follows; viz. 1. Have thou Riches? Thou have one to keep
and increase them. 2. Have thou none? Thou have one to help to get them. 3. Art
thou in Prosperity? Thy Happiness is doubled. 4. Art thou in Adversity? She Will
Comfort, assist, and bear a part of thy Burden to make it more tolerable. 5.
Art thou at home? She Will drive away Melancholy. 6. Art thou abroad? She looks
after thee going from home, wishes for thee in thy Absence, and joyfully
welcomes thee at thy return. 7. There Is nothing delightful without Society; no
Society so sweet as Matrimony. 8. The Band of Conjugal Love is Adamantine. 9.
The pleasant Company of Kinsmen increases, the number of Parents, Children,
Brothers, Sisters, and Nephews, is doubled. 10. Thou art made a Father by a
fair and happy Issue. 11. Moses curses the barrenness of Matrimony, how much
more of single Life? 12. If Nature her self escape not Punishment, surely thy
Will shall not avoid it.


Heinsius (a Learned man) faith, Nemo in Severissima Stoicorum Familia, etc.
There will not be found (I hope) no not in the severe Family of the Stoics,
any one Person that will refuse to submit his grave Beard and supercilious Look
to the clipping of a Wife, or disagree from the rest of that Sect in this
Particular. Women are styled by our ingenious Lord Verulam in his Essays.
Lord Chancellor, Deliciae Humani generis, solatio Vitae;
Blanditiae noctis, placidissinia cura Diei;
Vota Virum Juvenum Spes, --
And the Venusian Poet sings sweetly, Felices ter, and amplius
Horace.
Quos irrupta tenet copula,
Divulsus querimoniis
Suprema citius solvit amerdre.


In English thus: Thrice happy they, and more than that,
Whom Bands of Love so firmly ties,
That, without Brawls, till Death them part,
It Is undissolv'd and never dies.
There is no Joy, Burten's Mel. p. 585.
no Sweetness, no Pleasure, like to that of a Good Wife. Quam cum chara domi
Conjux, Fidusque Maritus,
Vnanimes degunt.
-- says our Latin Homer. Her Love can no more change than a Star his Course,
or Fate it is Everlasting Laws. Novisanus.
Matrimonium humano generi Immortalitatem tribuit.

Marriage makes us immortal. It is, as one says very prettily, Nodosa
Aeternitas, a kind of knotty Eternity, Immortality being, as it were, piec'd
and lengthned out by the Succession of Children. Tacitus lib. 4.
It Is Firmissimum Imperii Munimentum, The Seal and chief Prop of an Empire: and
the Poet Palingenius.
tells you, Indigne vivit, per quem non vivit and alter; Et,
Minuuntur atrae Conjuge Curae.
She is the sole Comfort of Man's Life; born ad Vsum and Lusum Hominum, for the
Use and Diversion of Man; she is Lechaeus.
Firmamentum Familiae, the Basis and solid Foundation of a Family. Optima viri
possessio est Vxor Benevola. A loving Wife is the best Possession a Man can
purchase. Mitigans omnia and avertens animum ejus a Tristitia, mild upon all
occasions, and the only Helebore to purge away her Consort's melancholy.

The best Possession is a Loving Wife, She tempers Anger, and diverts all
Strife. Euripides. Idem
Si commodas nanciscantur amores, etc. If fitly matched be Man and Wife, No
Pleasure's wanting to their Life.

Horace.
No such Comfort as Placens Vxor, a sweet Wife. Xenophon.
She is the highest ground of Humane Felicity. Theognis.
Nothing can be more amiable than an honest Woman; nothing conferring more Joy
upon man, says sententious Xistus. Brathwait. p. 345, 346.
In fine, She is in Quality a Helper, in Society a Comforter, in the perplexity
of her Consort a Counselor, and in all these a Sharer. Is her Husband young?
She will bear with his Youth till better Experience bring him to the Knowledge
of Man. Is he old? His Age shall beget the more Reverence in her. Is he rich?
much good may it do him, this shall not make her proud; but her Desire shall be
to improve it to his best Advantage. Is he poor? His Poverty shall make her
rich: There is no want where there wants no Content. Were he poor as Irus,
Fancy will make him dearer than rich Croesus. Her Husband may seem a Thersites
to others, but he is a Paris in her Eye. A Mother is the best Grammarian, let
the Grammaticasters boast never so vauntingly of their speaking well; when
every Nurse does shamefully exceed them in their Faculty of teaching. Had not
Speeches their Original from the Mother? Yes indisputably, and for that very
Reason every ones Native Language is called the Mother Tongue.

Fuller.
'Twas wittily replied of a Gentleman, who heard a drolling Batcheler say, Next
to no Wife a good Wife was best; no, Sir, said he; next to a good Wife, no Wife
is best. And as pleasantly said of another, who maintained; Brathwait's English
Gentleman. Pa. 256.
that Wives are young Men's Mistresses, Companions of middle Age, and old Men's
Nurses.

Let a man be never so Volatile, a good Wife will fix him; She is Res bona, not
bounded within the Limits of Predicable, Predicament or Topic.

Solomon. Prove. c. 18. v. 22.
It was the saying of the wisest of Kings, He that finds a Wife, finds a
good thing, and receives favor of the Lord; and that he might more
Emphatically express the incomparable estimat of a good Wife, and how far in
the scale of Judgment She is to be preferred before Substance, Riches, or any
worldly Inheritance, to give a more proper and genuine Distinction, he makes
use, not only of a distinct Gradation, but also a different Derivation, and
Riches are the Inheritance of the Father, but a prudent Wife comes of the
Lord, and many other Encomia of Women are scattered throwout Solomon's whole
Works: Prove. C. 11. V. 16.
as a gracious Woman retains Honor and Her price is far above Rubies: chap.
21. ver. 10. Nay, he styles her Coronam Viri, the Crown of her Husband; and St.
Paul call's her Gloriam Viri, the Glory of Man; Nay, the French say
proverbially, Femme bonne vant une Couronne; A good Wife is not to be valued
under the Price of a Diadem, And, as one says very well, Houses without Women
are Deserts and Places ill cultivated. Nay, where is there true Polity to be
found but in Houswifery!

The witty Epigrammatist styles good Wives Domiportae, Damae portae, etc. they
are the choicest Associats of human Solace, so that if the World were to be
held a Wilderness without Society, it might justly despair of that Comfort
without their Company: whence it is, that the Wiseman concludes, without a
Woman would the House mourn.

Surely, howsoever some no less properly then pregnantly have Emblematriz'd a
married Woman by a Snail, because she is Domiporta; and carries her House
about her; as is the property of a good Houswife, yet in my Judgment, Brathwait
pa. 298.
a modest, and well behaved Woman may, by her frequent Resort to public
Places, confer no less Benefit to such as observe her Behavior, than occasion
of profit to her private Family, where She is overseer. I have seen some (says
the same Author) in those Places of public Repair, express such a well seeming
State, without a just Formality, as that every Action deserved the Imitation of
such as were in their Company. Their Conceits were sweetly tempered, without
lightness, their Jests savory, yet without saltness; their Discourses free
without niceness; their Answers mild, without tartness; their Smiles pleasing,
mixed with Bashfulness; their Pace Graceful, without too much Activeness; Their
whole Posture Delightful, with a seeming Carelessness. These are such Mirrors of
Modesty, Patterns of Piety, as they would not for a World, transgress the
Bounds of Civility. These are Matrons in their Houses, and Models in public
Places.

It was a wild Speech of the Philosopher, to say, that if our Conversation
could be without Women, Angels would come down and dwell among us, but then
they must be evil ones; for the Good Angels durst not disallow of Marriage,
which God himself ordained, and has stamped his Blessing upon. But to pass by
such Moth-eaten Philosophers, and come to a Modern Physician of our own.

Dr. Brown in his Rel. Med.
It was a most Unmannerly thing of him, whilst he displays his own Religion, to
wish that there were a way to Propagate the World, otherwise than by
Conjunction with Woman (and Paracelsus, that German Quack, undertakes to teach
him that way) whereby he seems to Repine (tho (I understand) he himself Wiv'd a
little after) at the Honorable Degree of Marriage, Epistolae Hoelianae.
which I hold to be the Prime Link of Humane Society, the chiefest Happiness of
Mortals, and wherein Heaven has a special hand.

And Sir Kenelm Digby, in his Observations on Religio Medici, (whom Famous Dr.
Charleton thus Characterizeth; That Noble Person, who has built up his Reason
to so Transcendent a height of Knowledge, as may seem not much beneath the
state of Man in Innocence) Blames the Dr. for his wishing that Men could
Procreate, like Trees, without Conjunction, calling it the Foolishest Act of a
Wise Man (tho afterward he seems to Excuse himself) I believe (says that
Learned Knight) your Lordship (meaning Edw. Earl of Dorset, who desired him to
peruse that Book) will scarcely join with him in his Wish, that We might
Procreate, and beget Children without the help of a Woman, or without any
Conjunction or Commerce with that sweet Sex.

Then again, a little after: Besides his Unkindness, or rather Frowardness, to
that Tenderhearted Sex, (which must needs take it ill at his hands) Methinks
he sets Marriage at too low a Rate, which is assuredly the Highest and Divinest
Link of Human Society; and where he speaks of Cupid and Beauty, it is in such a
Phrase, as puts me in mind of the Learned Greek-Reader of Cambridge, Courting
his Mistress out of Stevens his The saurus. Thus far that Noble Knight, of that
Noble Sex.

But we can produce both Modern and Ancient Authority to confute Dr. Brown.

Burton, that Melancholic Wit, after some Discourse of Women, says, I am not
willing to prosecute the Cause against them; therefore take heed you mistake me
not; Matronam nullam ego tango. Horace.
I Honor the Sex with all Good Men, as I ought to do, and rather than
Displease them, I will take this Oath, Mercurius Britannicus Descript. l. f. 95.
Me nihil unquam mali Nobilissimo Sexui, vel verbo, vel facto machinaturum.
That I will never contrive any hurt against that Noble Sex, either in World or
Deed; And another Author declares himself thus: Ric. Whitlock, in his Magnetic
Lady.
I am none of those Vulgar reasoning Despifers of that Sex, which we cannot
deny to be as habitable a Part of the Microcosm or little World, as any, for
Abilities or Virtues, tho not so Populous.

As for Authority of the Ancients; the Great Greek Historian tells you plainly,
Xenophon.
that he thinks, among all God's Ordinances, scarce any one can be found that
is more Commendable or Profitable than Wedlock: Musonius, Hierocles, etc.
nay, there are other Ancient Sages, who declare, that they think it so
necessary to a good and convenient way of Living, that the Life of Man without
it seems to be maimed.

The Divine Philosopher will have it, Plato 6. de Leg.
that he that marries not before he is thirty five years of Age, shall be
forced, or punished, and the Money Consecrated to Juno's Temple, (who was
Goddess of Marriage) or applied to Public Use.

Mercurius Trismegistus (which is as much as to say in plain English, the
thrice Greatest) a very Ancient Philosopher, understanding the Virtues and
Perfections of Women, left this Recorded in his Writings to Posterity; That
those Men were to be shunned and extremely avoided, that had no Wives; because
that from a Woman, as from an abounding Fountain, all Perfection and Goodness
flows in a most plentiful manner.

Epictetus, an Eminent Philosopher, advises all Men, of what Condition soever,
to enter into the Happy Lists of a Married Life: nay, whole Nations (as well as
single Persons) have and do Honor their Wives at this day. The Affectionate
Sabines called their Wives Penates, or Houshold-Gods, for the incomparable
Comfort they conceived in them, and great Benefits derived from them; and that
not without Cause: for we read that Tres Filii ab Excubiis, quinque ab omnibus
Officiis liberabant; Three Children, among the Romans, freed the Father from
painful Offices, and Five from all Contributions: both Graecians and Romans
privileged Wedded Women; Aelian. l. 6. c. 5.
and tho the Romans had their Vestals, A. Gellius, l. 2. c. 15.
yet after thirty years continuance, the Cruelty of infore'd Chastity was no
longer in force.

By the Julian Law Precedence is given to him that has most Children; and in
Florence, at this day, he that has five Children, immediately upon the Birth of
the fifth is exempted from all Imposts and Subsidies; and here in England
likewise, a married Man (out of a tender Respect to his Posterity) is not so
soon pressed into the Wars, as a Batcheler. Nay Spain, at this present, is more
noble then the rest of the World, by giving the Surname of the maternal Line
very frequently to some of the Male Children.

The Civil, Common, and Divine Laws are all very favorable to Women.

The Imperial, or Civil Law permits not a Woman, tho a criminal, to go into
the common Gaol.

The common Law, by the courtesy of England, Dalton.
if Woman arrive at any degree of Estate, they never lose it by marrying after
more meanly, but still take place according to the State of their first
Husband; Nay farther, Instit. Imperat. de Nuptiis.
the Law tenders the speedy advancement of Women, quia maturiora sunt vota
Mulierum, quam Virorum. Women are sooner capable of Conception then Men of
Generation, which is the Reason the Law permits Women to marry at the Age of
twelve, and Men not till fourteen.

Brathwait. pa. 257.
The harsh and Eremitical conceit of Arminius the Ruler of Carthage, touching
Marriage; who being asked, when shall a young Man marry? replied not yet; When
an old Man? Not at all; proceeded rather from Disability then Truth or Reason,
and therefore not to be regarded: for had it bin Arminius his fortune to have
matched with Arminia, he would doubtless have fallen into Admiration of so
Sacred a Rite, rather than into distaste.

Such Persons therefore, who have their Humor in their Ink-horn, and rail
against Marriage; if ever they enter into the State of Wedlock, deserve for
their Pains a pair of large and spacious Horns, that may extend from one end of
our Metropolis to the other (our mother City, so called in honor of Women)
and so we leave them to the Admiration of all Mankind, to be laughed at, like
Actaeon, for their egregious Folly.

Mount agu's Accom. Woman.
But is it not a strange Custom, and worthy of Reproof, to see Men take all
kind of Liberty, without allowing the least? One might think, by their Tyranny,
that Marriage was instituted only to make them Gaolers for Women. There is much
Ingratitude, as well as Injustice, to exact a Fidelity, which one will not
return, when the obligations to it are equal. Women have Wit and Conscience
enuf to believe, that revenge would cost them too dear, if they lost their own
Virtue to take satisfaction of their Husbands Vitiousness. Octavia did not
desist from loving Marc Antony singularly, whilst he made his Amors to
Cleopatra, and left a greater Beauty at Rome, to possess a less in Egypt. They
that have this Constancy deserve Admiration; but those that have it not, have
some color for their Weakness; Example pleads for them; for they imagine that
it is not likely, that a Crystal should resist Blows, that might break
Diamonds, or Marble.

Virginal Chastity.
DEmocion, the Athenianess, being a Virgin, and understanding that Leosthenes
(to whom she had bin solemnly contracted) was slain in the Lemnian War, being
impatient to survive him, laid violent hands on her self.

Martia, the unspotted Daughter of Varro, (who is styled Romanorum Doctissimus,
the most Learned Man of the once most Learned Nation the Romans) was of such
admirable and undefiled Chastity, that she being most Excellent in the
Ingenious Art of Painting, did so alienate her Pencil from any thing that might
have the least appearance of Dalliance or VVantonness, that she was never known
to draw the Face of a Man; and the same is storied of Lala Sizizena, of equal
Excellency both in that Art and Virtue.

Selymus, the grand Seignior, had several stately Ships sent him as Presents,
(tho they never were in his Possession) and in the richest of them all, was a
noble Cyprian Lady, destinated to the Lust of the Mahumedan Empire; who to
prevent so barbarous a Rape, fired certain Barrels of Gunpowder, by the
Violence whereof, both the Vessel and the Booty in it was in part burned, in
part drowned. A Famous and Heroic Act (says my Author) inferior to none of
the Roman Dames, so much commended in their Stories, tho more to be commended
in a Roman, than a Christian Lady.

Matilda, the Beautiful English Virgin, Lib Dunmow. Stow's Annals. Weaver's
Funeral Acts and Monuments.
was the Daughter of Robert Fitz-Walter, the most valiant Knight of that Age,
being in the year of our Lord 1213. It is recorded there arose a great Discord
between King John and his Barons upon the account of Matilda (for her matchless
Beauty surnamed the fair) whom the King caressed and courted, tho lasciviously;
but was so deservedly unsuccessful, that he could neither obtain her own, nor
her Father's consent to any Act so sordid and unlawful; whereupon (and for
other like Causes) issued War (commonly known by the name of the Barons Wars)
throughout the whole Realm: to revenge which Indignity (as King John misjudged
it) he exiled the said Fitzwalter, with others, demolished his Castle called
Baynard, and other his stately Structures; this done, he sent his Messageur
d'Amour to renew his old, yet not extinguished Amors to Matilda, who treated
her with all the Respect and Reverence imaginable; but ineffectually; She being
too worthy to be his Whore, tho too worthless to be his Wife, and he most
inhumanly and profanely, quia noluit consentire toxicavit eam, because she
would not expose her pure Body to his impure Embraces, poisoned her with a
poached Egg, in the very Nunnery where she fled for Sanctuary, and Preservation
of her Chastity against the fiery Assaults of a burning and salacious Prince,
and was afterward interred in the little Church of Dunmow in Essex.

In the time of Heraclius, the Roman Emperor, there was a certain Maid named
Phara, who made a Vow of Chastity; but at length, partly in Obedience to her
Father's commands, partly being tired out with Assiduous and unintermitted
Importunities, was overpersuaded to a married Life; but withal, racked with
internal Regret, and overwhelmed with insupportable Grief, that in an
inconsiderable space of Time such an Ocean of Tears fell from the Cataracts of
her Eyes, that she wept her self blind.

When the City of Amileia was taken by the barbarous Huns, a Lady of Honorable
Parentage and Noble Descent ('it is pity that ever the Sponge of Oblivion should
have wiped her Name out of the Records of Time) being taken captive, and
finding it decreed by cruel Fate, that Death, or the loss of Chastity must be
her bitter Potion, made choice of the former (tho the King of Terrors) rather
than the latter; which She thus effected: for by a pious fraud (and so it was,
if ever any Deceit merited that Name) she feigned to condescend to the Will and
Lust of her intended Ravisher, and at length with Prayers and Tears (two
prevalent Arguments, even with the most profligate Barbarians) obtained leave
of her brutish Keeper, to go and petition the Gods to pardon so foul a Crime,
desiring to be conducted to the top of the House; where she no sooner arrived,
but said, with a charming look and an undaunted Resolution, Villain, if thou will enjoy me, follow me, and immediately precipitated her self, and was broken
to pieces with the fall, preferring the loss of her Life before that of her
Chastity.

Baldraca, a Maid both young and beautiful (two charming Qualifications) tho of
very poor and mean Parentage, and too too cruelly harassed by Penury and Want;
yet could not Otho, one of the twelve Roman Caesar's, subdue her inexpugnable
Chastity with all the Batteries of Bribery, or alliciating and fascinating
Temptations of Power and Grandeur; resolving to live Chastely in a homely Rural
Hovel, rather than dissolutely in a Princely Palace, or Imperial Apartment.

Lucia, a fair Virgin of Syracuse in Sicily, adorned with inward and outward
perfections, both of Body and Mind, her very Eyes cast such a sparkling and
irresistible Luster, that she inflamed the Syracusan Tyrant, Dionysius,
insomuch that he was captivated with their Beauty, even to the highest dotage,
and used all possible means fairly (if possible) to obtain her, and she on the
contrary, to frustrate his wanton Desires; but at length he resolved to conquer
by Force, since he could not by Courship, and acquainted her therewith, who
inveighing against her fad Fate, and the occasion thereof, her Eyes, plucked
them out, and presented them to the Tyrant; saying, Take my Eyes, which thou so
much admirest, and satisfy thy exorbitant Appetite and Desire; by which, more
than manly Action, she secured her Chastity.

Sextus Marius, the Roman, had a Beautiful Daughter, who so moved Tiberius the
Emperor, that his Thoughts were solely taken up with her Matchless Features;
which Amorous Intrigue, as soon as it reached her Father's Ear, he sent her
into the Country, to remove that admired Object from him, and to try if her
absence might cure the Lascivious Distemper that he labored under; but he left
nothing unatrempted which Love instructs Men with, in such cases, to gratify
his Libidinous and Unlawful Passion; so that all means proving ineffectual, he,
at last, had recourse to Base and sordid Practices, beneath an Emperor, or
Man, and caused an Accusation to be brought against her, (by foul and damnable
Subornation) of Incest with her own Father. She perceiving there was no
possibility of escaping the Tyrant's hands, accosts her Father with this
Resolute Language; Sir, said she, let him not dispose of us both to his Will,
and leave an indeleble Stain upon our Names and Posterity, but rather let us Die
honorably. Her Father, astonished and ashamed to be moved to so Heroic an
Action by his Daughter, killed himself first, and she did the like after him.

Brathwait, p. 329.
A Religious Votaress, whose chaste Bosom was a Sacred Recluse, Dedicated to
Goodness, upon the Rencounter of a Lascivious Lover, returned this Modest
Answer; Sir, I Honor you so much, that I have chosen rather to suffer, than by
my Tyrannous Beauty to make you a Prisoner. Whereupon she discovered her Face,
in Complexion much altered by some Impostur'd Colors, that she caused to be
laid upon it: Upon the sight thereof, he solemnly vowed to Relinquish his Suit,
imagining that she had poisoned her Face to wean him from his Impure Affection;
which she had no sooner said, but running to a Spring near adjoining, to wash
it off; See, continued she, I am the same I was, but you are much better, for
now you are brought to see your Error, in being so much Taken with a Skin-deep
Beauty, which only consists in Dye and Color.

I have heard of a Noble Lady in my time, Brathwait' p. 339.
(says the same Author) whose Descent and Desert equally proclaim her Worth,
so tender of the Esteem of her Honor, that she held it scarce safe to receive
any Letter from a Great Personage, whose Reputation was touched by Rumor; a
good way to preserve her Honor impregnable, and to raise it above the reach of
Calumny.

This might be illustrated by several Instances; and first, those Locrian
Virgins deserve Eternal Memory, it being the Custom of Locris, their Native
Country, to send the Virgins to Troy, which Practice continued for the space
of a thousand years, yet it was never heard, by any Authentic History, that
any of those Maids were ever Devirginated; a number of years almost as
Prodigious as their not to be Exampled Chastity.

Who can likewise pass over in Silence those seven Milesian Virgins, who, at
such time as the Conquering Gauls Raged and Raved every where, Harrasing all
Places they came to, and Ravishing all Females they met with, (subjecting all
to Fire and Faggot) Deprived themselves of Life, rather than to be deprived by
Hostile Force of their Honor.

But to instance in this for all (for it would be too Voluminous, I cannot say
Tedious, to Enumerate Particulars. An Island in Aegean Sea, between Lesbos and
Samos.
) The Island of Chios; now Cio, it is reported by Incontrovertible Tradition,
that the Laws of Honor and Chastity were by the Ladies of that Country
preserved inviolably for the space of seven hundred years complete.

Pliny and Vaberius Maximus, lib. 8.
Tutia, a Vestal Virgin, proved her Chastity by the old, miraculous way of
carrying Water in a Sieve, (a Trial among the Romans, (tho a most unreasonable
one) whereby she cleared her self from the horrid Accusation of Incest.

The Lady Ebb, Speed's Chronicle.
with her chaste Nuns, to avoid the Savage and filthy Pollution of the
Barbarians, Disfigured themselves, by cutting off their Noses and upper Lips,
lest the Bain of their Beauty should prove the Bain of their Honor and Honesty.

If it should be objected, that Anaxarete was Cruel in seeing Iphis hang
himself in Despair, at her own door, because he could not obtain her Love; To
this Mr. Mountague answers very pertinently and pithily, Accomp. Wom. p. 101.
The Refusal was Just, because the Demand was not so; 'Twas an Offender that did
Injustice on himself for his Temerity. Worthy Women value less the Ruin of
Importunate Men, than of their own Honor; and it were to be Ill-advis'd to be
Cruel to themselves, to be so unfittingly Pitiful to Insolence or Detraction.

Of Conjugal Constancy.
Brathwait, p. 329.
Valerius Maximus reconeth the loss of Aemilia, Wife of Africanus Senior,
beyond a Parallel in any of the other Sex, for the Conquest of her Jealousy
(the most Tyrannical Passion in Man or Woman) conniving at her Husband's
Entertainment of her unappointed Official or Maid; and all (says he) Ne
Domitoremorbis Impudicitiae reum ageret, that she might not stain her Husband's
Triumphs with the imputation of Incontinency; an Action, wherein, not only she,
but other Women, have far outstript all Men, says Cornelius Agrippa, (the
Female's professed Champion) as he instanceth in Sarah, Leah, Rachel, etc.

Alceste, Daughter of Peliast, King of Thessaly, seeing her Husband grievously
distempered, and hearing from the Oracle of Apollo, that it was not in the
Power of Drugs, or Art of Physic to recover him, unless some of his nearest
Relations did dye to save him; and when all his Friends and Followers, nay his
very Parents, Etsi decrepiti, tho decrepit, with one Foot already in the Grave,
refused, through a servile Fear; she undauntedly with a brave and generous
Courage, tho in the prime of her Blooming years, sacrificed her self, for which
noble Act, she has been highly celebrated by the Greek and Latin Poets,
particularly by Euripides.

Priscana, an affectionate and virtuous Wife, knowing that her Husband was
afflicted with a dangerous and incurable Malady, taking pity of him for the
insufferable pains, that she was sensible he endured, with great constancy and
a generons Soul advised him to put a period to his Grief by the only infallible
Remedy, Death; promising to accompany him therein; whereunto her Husband
consenting, went to the Summet of a high Rock, and there lovingly enfolded in
each others Arms, they precipitated themselves together in the Sea; whose
Praise a French Sarazinus, l. 3.
Poet sings thus sweetly; which I have here transcribed at large for the
excellency thereof; and the satisfaction of those Ladies that are expert in
that Language.

Priscana aima mieux son Mari; quae Soy Mesme;
Car pour finir son Malelle advanza le sien;
Son Amor fut Extreme en un Peril Extreme;
Il faut Aimer du tout, on n' Aimer die tout rien:
Voyant mourant en luy, and son Coeur and son Ame,
Elle n'eust pas le coeur de survivre a son coeur:
Le Mari, eut de l'heur en une tell Femme,
Mais en un tell Mari la Femme eut du malheur:
Comme ils furent conjoints es Acts de la Joye,
Ils le furent aussi es Acts de l'Ennuy;
Le chemin fut egal, mais diverse la voye,
Son Mari vit par Elle, Elle mourut pour Luy.
Camma, the Wife of Sinaltus (of whom 'twas said it is a great difficulty to
decide, whether she was most indetted to Art, or Nature) whose Affection to her
Husband was admirable: a famous Lord ( Sinorix by name) highly descended, great
in Means and mighty in Authority, caressed and courted her with Persuasions,
Tears, Prayers, and all Imaginable Artifice, offering her his Service, Life,
Power, Wealth and all whatsoever he was Master of; but these Solicitations and
Proffers, with the luster of his Quality, not having force enuf to shake the
Resolution of this Lady, he determins to murder her Husband, thinking him to be
the cause (whilst living) that all his Hopes were frustrated, which he effects
accordingly; and after this Cruelty so perpetrated, he acquaints her Friends
with his earnest and violent Desires to marry her, who were very willing to be
allied to a Person of that Nobility and Fortune, and overpersuaded her to
embrace so advantageous an offer; Camma seems pleased with the Motion, and
consents, the better to revenge her Husbands Death; The wedding day being
appointed, and nothing but the Ceremony of Marriage wanting, Camma, with a
smiling Countenance, takes Sinorix by the hand, and they both prostrated
themselves at the Altar of Diana; and after she had poured, in honor of the
Godess, a Cup full of poisoned Hydromel, drank the one half to him, and gave
him the reft, who pledged her very joyfully, not imagining in the least, there
was Death in the Cup; she seeing her Design take effect, cast her self down
witn Reverence before the Image of Diana, to whom she rendered Thanks, and begged
Pardon in this short Ejaculation: Great Goddess! thou know with what
Constraint and purpose I consented to the Marriage of this Murderer; If Grief
could kill, as often as it is extreme, I had bin long since in the Elysian
Fields, the place of Bliss and Happiness for all departed Souls; but I refused
not to continue here for an opportune time to take a full revenge on this
perfidious Wretch, whom here thou see, and yet believes that I can love him,
tho he has robbed me of my dearest Sinaltus: then turning to languishing
Sinorix, said, Thou barbarous Villain! consider with thy self and Confess what
right I have to sacrifice thy Life to that which thou have taken from my
beloved Husband; and have only deferred my own end to give Posterity a more
remarkable Testimony of my Love and thy Cruetly: Camma was so happy as to see
Sinorix dye first, tho he drank last; and the Gods gave her this satisfaction
for her Loyalty, who ended her Life joyfully, calling upon Sinaltus to show him
the Revenge she had taken of his Death, and to accompany her in the Passage to
the other World. Can there be a more Noble and Resolute Example of Constancy
given to the World by Man, than this Heroic Action? And was not he a Cynic, who
maintained, that among the whole Female Sex there could not be found one Woman
Constant? but this does too apparently confute that Groundless and Erroneous
Assertion.

Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6.
Portia, the Wife of Brutus, and Daughter of Cato, hearing that her Husband was
vanquished in the Battle at Philippi, and slain; she feared not by her Womanish
Courage to imitate, if not Exceed her Father's Resolution in his Death; for
when all Weapons and Instruments of Death were strictly kept from her, she
expired by swallowing hot, burning Coals; herein only they differ, that he by a
common, she by an Unheard of Death was extinguished.

Lucretia, Daughter of Tricipitinus, Prefect of Rome, and Wife to Tarquinius
Collatinus; Sextus Tarquinius was Enamored and Captivated by her admirable
Beauty; but he, tho the Son of a King, not prevailing by Courtship, resolved to
Force her; and accordingly, having found an opportunity, violently rushed into
her Bedchamber with his Sword drawn, (and a Look more terrible than the Sword,
nay, Death it self) Resolving not only to kill her, if she did not yield to his
Embraces, but after he had Murdered her, to lay the dead Body of a Slave in her
Arms; to the end those that should find her in that posture, might think her
slain as an Adulteress: She, terrified with these Menaces, accompanied with
Furious and wild Looks, and trembling like a Tender Lamb, that is newly yean'd
upon a Cake of Ice, he Bruitishly Ravished her; but in the Morning, she sent
for her Father, Husband, and the rest of her Friends, and breaking forth into a
Deluge of Tears, acquainted them with the Inhuman Rape of the Barbarous Tyrant;
and immediately, pulling out a Knife, (the fatal Instrument which she had
procured for that purpose) stabbed her self. Her Relations hereupon make a
public Discovery of the Hellish Fact to the People, who forthwith took up
Arms, drove that Family out of Rome, and Banished, or rather Extirpated, both
their King and Kingship.

Stapleton's Juvenal.
T. Collatinus is said to have Engraven this Inscription upon his Wife's
Monument, yet extant at Rome, in the Bishop of Viterbo's Palace. Collatinus
Tarquinius dulciffimae Conjugi; and Ineomparabili Pudicitiae Decori, Mulierum
Gloriae, vixit Annis 32, Mensibus 2, diebus 6. proh dolor! quae fuit charissima.

Sophronia, a Roman Lady, seeing that she could by no means possible avoid the
Importunate and Lascivious Suit of Decius, for the Preservation of her
Chastity, rather than subscribe to his Courtship, by the Consent of her own
Husband, to whom she communicated his intended Lascivious Amors, gave her Soul
a Passport into the Elysian shades by the Point of a Sword.

Sulpitia, Pliny, l. 4.
being strictly kept up, and circumspectly watched by her Mother Julia, for
fear she should follow her Husband Lentulus Crustellio, then banished by the
Triumvirat, and confined to Sicily. She, notwithstanding the Watchful Eye of
her Parent, put on the Apparel of a Servant, attended only with two Handmaids,
and as many Menservants, privately passed through their Guards and Watches,
and by secret Flight came incognita to the Place whither he was Proscribed;
leaving all the Pleasures and Delicacies of Rome, to participate with the
Miseries of her Exiled Husband.

Whitlock's Magnetic Lad. p. 327
Hipsicratea presents her self next, a rare Example of Matrimonial Association,
in Adverse as well as Prosperous Fortune; Trooping with her Husband Mithridates
(King of Pontus) in Man's Apparel, Ruffling her Incomparable Beauty with
hardships of Weather, Exposing her Tenderness, nay Life, to such Perils as
might daunt, even Masculine Courage; Id. p. 328.
a Comfort (says my Author) to her Husband, when expelled his Kingdom; Cum
Domo enim, and Penatibus vagari se credidit, Vxore simul exulante, thinking
himself at home and in his own Territories, as long as she sweetened his Exile
by her sweet Society: and, as another observes, Valor. Max. l. 4. c. 6. de
Amor. Conj.
she assisted him in all Labors and Hazards of the Warin a Masculine Habit,
departing with the chief Ornament of her Beauty; Tonsis enim capillis, Equo se
and Armis assuefecit, quo facilius Laboribus and Periculis ejus interesset. She
shaved her Hair, and accustomed her self to Arms and Riding, that she might
share with him the better in his Labors and Dangers: and afterward, in his
Flight from Pompey, surnamed the Great, accompanied him in all his Misfortunes,
with a Mind and Body equally unwearied. She is solemnly Registered by this Grave
Author, as a Noble Precedent of Matrimonial Loyalty, and Conjugal Virtue, such
as might raise a mean Person to the Quality of a Queen, but a Queen to the
State and Honor of a Deess.

Penelope, the Wife of Ulysses, of whom one says, Penelope for spending chaste
her days,
As worthy as Ulysses was of Praise.
Brathw. p. 328, 329. A daily Siege she suffered, and in her Conquest equal was
she to those Victorious Peers of Greece, who made Troy their Triumph;
Estimation was her highest Prize; Suitors she got, and those many, yet among
them her dear Ulysses was never forgot, and Absence had not Estranged her
Affection: Youthful Comforts could not move in her Thoughts the least
Distraction, neither could Opportunity induce her to give way to any Light
Action. Well might Greece then Esteem her Penelope of more Lasting Fame than
any Pyramid that ever she erected; her Unblemished Reputation was of far purer
Materials than any Ivory Statue; nor was Rome less beholding to her Lucretia,
who sought Honor at so high a rate, that she held Death too light to redeem it.

Tho force frights Foes, and Furies gazed upon her;
These were no Wounds, but Wonders to her Honor.
The presence of a Prince, no less Amorous than Victorious, could not win her,
tho with him, Price, Prayers and Power did jointly woe her. Well deserved two
such modest Matrons the choicest Embraces of two such Heroic Champions, as
might equal their constant Loves with the tender of their dearest Lives.

Claudia, the Daughter of Claudius Apollinaris, and Wife of Statius Papinius,
the Neapolitan, was so chaste and modest that she preserved her conjugal Love
and Fidelity unblemished and undefiled in the absence of her Husband for twenty
years complete; a second (and Modern) Penelope.

Olympias, Wife of Philip of Macedon, and Mother to Alexander the Great (...)
being puffed up with his Success and Victories, fondly caused himself to be
called the Son of Jupiter Hammon, wrote to his Mother in this manner; King
Alexander, the Son of Jupiter Hammon, to his Mother Olympias sends health; to
whom with great Prudence and Modesty she Rescrib'd; Dear Son, as you love me,
instead of doing me Honor, proclaim not my Dishonor, neither accuse me before
jealous Juno; besides it is a great aspersion you cast upon me, to make me a
Strumpet, tho to Jupiter himself; A great Moderation in a Woman, who for no
swelling Titles, or vain Ostentation, would be won to lose the Honor of being
called a chaste and loyal Wife; a pretty droling check to the vain Glory of her
Aspiring and Ambitious Son.

The noble Lady Armenia, being solemnly invited to the wedding of King Cyrus,
went thither with her Husband, in the Evening, to be a witness to the complete
Solemnization of those Royal Rites; but being returned, her Husband ak'd her
how she liked the Bridegroom? whether he was not an amiable and comely Prince?
To whom she gave this Answer; Indeed Sir, I know not; for all the while I was
at that Solemnity, I fixed my Eye upon no Person in the Company, but your self.

Hiero being in company with an inveterat Enemy, who could find no means to
fasten an Affront upon him at last reproached him with a stinking Breath; at
which, being not a little disgusted, he went home in a Fury, and blamed his
Wife for not acquainting him therewith; that so by some Artificial helps he
might have cured or abated that same Noisomness; but was soon appeased with her
Answer, when she made him this modest Reply; I thought all Men had the like
Savor.

Biblia, a fair Lady, Erasmus, lib. 8. Apophtheg.
Wife of Duellius, was so chaste, that she never touched the Lips of any Man,
but her Husband, and therefore thought all Men, like him, to have a noisome
stinking Breath.

Bona Dea, a Woman so called in Rome, who was so much ravished with the Society
of her Husband, and so averse to all other, that she never saw any other Man
all her lifetime, which was the Reason the Women Sacrificed to her in the
Night, as a chaste and pure Goddess. Caja Caecilia, (alias Tanaquil) the Wife of
Caius Tarquinius, was so chaste and good, that those who designed to enter into
the Bands of Matrimony, used frequently to repeat her name for good luck sake,
as they superstitiously conceived; her constant Motto was, Vbi tu Caja, ibi
ego, Caja.

It was an excellent and witty Answer of the Lacedaemonian Wives, who being
wantonly courted, made this Reply; Certainly, we should give way to your
Request, but this you sue for is not in our Power to grant, and no wise man
will request impossibilities: for when we were Maids, we were at the Disposal
of our Parents, and now, being Wives, of our Husbands: an innocent and
unanswerable Dilemma.

I have lately seen a Discourse (says the Hayward of Women
Author) entitled a true Narrative of Rathean Herpine; who (about the time
that Spinola, the Bavarian, first entered the Palatinate) finding her Husband,
Christopher ( Thaeon by name) Apoplex'd in all his Limbs and Members, with an
Invincible Courage, and unparalled Affection, at several Journeys, bore him
on her Back, the space of one thousand three hundred English Miles to a Bath,
for his Recovery. Let any of those Female Critics produce me a parallel to
this Story in any of their own Sex.

Eleanor, Howel's Survey of London.
the Daughter of Ferdinand, King of Castile, was given in Marriage to Edward
the first, King of England, and accompanied him into the holy Land; who, when
he was at Ptolemais, happened to be dangerously wounded by Anzazin, with the
Assassin's envenomed Knife, which could not be cured by Physicians; being given
over by them, his Wife betook her self to a strange and unheard of Cure; day by
day, she licked the Wound with her Tongue, and sucked out the Venomous Humors,
till the Wound was cauteris'd and healed; Whereupon a Learned Man breaks out
into this Exclamation. Rodericus Toletanus, li. 1.
Quid igitur hujus Mulieris side rarius audiri? Quid Mirabilius essepotest?
etc. What greater fidelity than this Woman's? what more wonderful thing can be;
Fuller's Holy War.
so soverain a Medicine is a Woman's Tongue, anointed with the Virtue of loving
Affection. Upon her return from the Holy Land, she died at Hardeby, a Town near
Lincoln, and King Edward, in recompense of her conjugal Love, and Memory of so
dear a Wife, at every place where her Corpse rested, in her removal thence, he
erected a rich Cross of stone, with the Queen's Image and Arms; as at Grantham,
Woborn, Northamton, Stony-Stratford, Dunstable, St. Albans, Waltham,
West-Cheap, and Charing Cross, from whence she was carried to Westminister, and
there interred with great State, Pomp and Solemnity.

These are Examples of Single Women, we will add and conclude with those of a
whole Town, Guelph in Wittenberg by name, which when Conrade the Third Emperor
besieged, and could not by any means be dissuaded from Sacking the Town, and
putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword; at last, by the Importunity of the
Women, who rushed out of the Town, and cast themselves at his Feet, he granted
their Politic and Pious Request, and Published a Diploma, that they should
depart the Town without the least Molestation or Disturbance, and carry so much
with them as they could bear, and no more, who all unanimously agreeing, left
all their Portable Riches and Treasure, and the Countess carried her Husband
Guelph on her back, and the rest their Husbands, after her Example: At the
sight of so great Conjugal Love and Affection, and this witty Stratagem, the
Emperor conceived so great Pleasure and Delight, that bursting into Tears of
Joy, (his Courage could not prevent his Compassion in so eminent a Case) he did
not only divest himself of his intended Fierceness and Fury, but spared the
Town, pardoned Guelph and his Adherents, and entered into a firm League of
Friendship with them for the future; nay farther, the bare Narration of this
Story (as Bodin, an excellent Historian reports) Recovered Lorenzo de Medici of
a Dangerous Distemper which had baffled all the Art of Physic before, and was
thereby restored to his former Health, without any Medicinal Applications.

Vidual Continency.
AN Extraordinary and rare Example of Vidual Continency was Artemisia, Queen of
Caria, who living Chaste ever after the Death of her Husband Mausolus, got all
his Ashes in an Urn, of which she took a Dram every morning in some liquid
Vehicle next her Heart, saying, That her Body was the fittest place to be a
Sepulcher for her dearest Consort; notwithstanding, that she had erected
another outward Tomb for him at Halicarnasseus, which continues to this day,
for its Stateliness one of the Wonders of the World; thus she continued this
Dose every Morning, till it was all drunk off, but being wasted with continual
Lamentations and Grief, dwindled away, till at last she died of a Consumption:
nay, at this day, in several Parts of the Oriental World, such is the Rare Love
of Wives to their Deceased Husbands, that they throw themselves alive into the
Funeral Pile, tho in the Flower of their years, to accompany their Bodies (as
they conceit) into the other World.

St. Jerome against Jcvinian.
It is reported by an Holy Father, that when Cato's Daughter's Daughter had
Mourned four Weeks for her Husband, a certain Matron coming to comfort, and
dissuade her from Excessive Grief; asked her at last how long she intended to
mourn? She made her this Reply, (so great was her Affection to her Husband)
That she would make an end of Mourning, when she made an end of Living.

Zenobia, Queen of Armenia, seeing her Husband defeated in a Battle, and not
being able to follow him, being big with Child, begged of him very earnestly to
kill her, that she might not fall into the Rude and unmerciful hands of the
Enemies; which he thinking to do, wounded her with with his Sword; but being
taken, and carefully looked after, recovered her Health; and Tiridates, who
vanquished her Husband, Married her (which she could not oppose, being at the
Disposal and Mercy of her Enemy) for the great Affection he found in her to her
Consort; but tho her Condition was the same, and she was still a Queen, yet she
lived a Melancholic and Solitary Life; and being asked by some of her Ladies of
Honor, why she did not adorn her self suitable to her Degree, and appear with
Grandeur and Splendour at Public Interviews and Solemnities, as other Women
did; She made this Answer; It pleases me, that I have for my Ornament the
Virtue of my Deceased Husband.

Next, give me leave to acquaint you with a Story of Clara Cervanda, who for
Conjugal Chastity, and Vidual Continency, I am persuaded History has no
Parallel.

This Clara Cervanda was the Wife of Bernard Valdaura, related by an Eminent
Author, Ludovicus Vives, lib. 2. de Christ. Foemin.
who was very well acquainted with her; This Excellent Woman was a Native of
the City of Bruges in Flanders, and Married with Valdaura, then about forty
years of Age; and the first night he Bedded her, his Legs were swelled with
Linen Rolls, (a sign of an unsound and Diseased Husband) yet (to be short) she
and her Mother attended so diligently on him for six weeks together, See the
Story at large in D. Hackwel's Apology, etc.
that they never put off their Clothes but only to shift them, never went into
Bed, nor slept above an hour or two in a Night, and that in their Apparel; the
ground of this was the French Disease, and she notwithstanding did Recover him
for a while; insomuch as some Persons said, that God had decreed to take away
Valdaura, but his Wife was obstinately resolved not to let him depart out of
her hands; and tho his Breath through that corrupt and nauseous Distemper, was
very unsavory, yet she was offended with Vives for saying so; nay farther, she
sold all her Rings, Jewels, and Plate, to maintain him in his Sickness, had
several Children by him, and when he died, tho so loathsomly diseased, her
Sorrow was excessive; and tho she was not in years, yet she vowed never to
marry again, because she questioned whether she should ever meet with so Loving
a Husband as her dearly beloved Bernard Valdaura.

What singular Mirrors of Vidual Continency and Matron-like Modesty were
Cornelia, Vetruria, Livia, and the most excellent Widow Salvina, to whom St.
Jerome directed many sweet and comfortable Epistles? Brathwait p. 340, 341.

The Government, Polity, Valor, and Courage of Women.
THE Abilities and Faculties of the Soul appear in Civil and Ecclesiastical
Affairs, in Matters of Government and Religion; in neither of these are we
destitute of Examples of able Women, and for State Affairs and Government our
late Age has given us a Queen that former Kings have scarcely equaled; and in
the Venetian Story it is recorded, that certain Matrons of that City were sent
by Commission in quality of Ambassadors; and many times the Voices of Great
Men in the greatest of Civil or Ecclesiastical Assemblies, have bin in the
Power and Disposition of Women; Hence it is, Dr. Done.
that in the Elder times we find as many Epistles of the Bishops of Rome (when
they stood in need of Court-Assistance) to the Emperors Wives, Mothers,
Sisters, and Women of other Interests in the Emperors Favor and Affection, as
to the Emperors themselves.

It is an Historical Observation, Bodin de Republ. l. 6. c. 4.
that at one time the Crown fell to the Lot of Women, and those all of one
Name, viz. Mary: it was so with us in England and Scotland; it was so in
Denmark and Hungary too, all four Mary's; and indeed Mary is the Name of Woman
in general; for when Adam says of Eve, She shall be called Woman, in the
Arabic Translation it is, She shall be called Mary; and in pure Hebrew it
signifies Exaltation.

Hormisda was a Great and Mighty Man among the Persians, and one of most Noble
Extract: one of that Name among them, Sozimus and Marcellinus.
as several Authors commemorate, being confined to a certain Mountain, was
there Fettered, and kept by a strict Guard of Persians, who, against the Law of
that Kingdom, purposed to invest his younger Brother in the State Imperial; but
it happened, during his Confinement, that his Wife (the Remembrance of whose
Name it is great pity that Time has abolished, and not left it to Posterity)
thus contrived and procured his Enlargement; She sent him a Fish, as a Present,
of an extraordinary Bigness, and in the Belly conveyed an Iron File, and some
other Engines fit for his purpose, committing it to the Care and Charge of one
of her most Faithful Eunuchs; desiring her Husband, by his Mouth, not to have
the Fish cut up in the presence of any Persons whatsoever, only to make an
Happy Use of such things as he should find-inclosed therein. To his Keepers
(the better to hide the Stratagem) she sent Camels laden with several Meats and
Wines. Hormisda soon apprehending the Plot, gave it a bold and resolute
Performance; for having first Filed off his Irons, he changed Habit with his
Eunuch, and taking advantage of their Feasting and Carouzing, passed safely
through them all; and by the Contrivance and Polity of his Wife, came at
length to the possession of his undoubted Right which his younger Brother had
usurped.

Cyrus, having alienated the Persians from King Astyages, was overcome in
Battle, his Soldiers flying toward the City for Refuge; insomuch that the
Enemy was ready to enter with them; but the Women perceiving it, issued out of
the Gates, holding up their Clothes as high as their Breasts, met them running,
and reproved them, saying, O ye Cowards, and Basest of Men, whither fly you?
Have you any hopes to hide your selves in these places from whence you came?
This Object cast such a shameful blush upon them, that returning, and renewing
the Battle smartly, Defeated the Conquerours, and they obtained a glorious
Victory: in memory of which Action, Cyrus made a Law, that what Persian King
soever should approach that City, at his Entry thereof should bestow on every
woman there a piece of Gold.

The renowned Matron, commonly called Arria Matter, (because she had a Daughter
of the same Name) understanding that Poetus, her Husband was condemned to dye,
and willing that he should expire with his own hand, rather than by the stroke
of a common Hangman; persuaded him to a Roman Resolution; but finding him
somewhat terrified at the Approach of his Death; she snatched up a Sword,
wherewith she transpierced her self; and then with an undaunted Courage,
plucked it off her Bosom, and presented it to her Husband, with these few and
last Words, Poet, non dolet, behold, Poetus, it has done me no harm, and so
fell down dead at his Feet. In whose Commendation the witty * Epigramatist has
made an Epigram, Martial. li. 1.
whereby he Celebrates her matchless Resolution to all succeeding Times.

It Is reported of Valasca, Queen of the Bohemians, who for her Courage obtained
the Surname of Bold, that having (by Reason of the roughness and insolence of
Men which they lived under in the time of Primislaus) made a Conjuration with
those of her own Sex, to take away all the usurped Jurisdiction and Prerogative
of Men; and instructed them in military Discipline, levied a War, met with
their Husbands, engaged them, and totally routed them, by which means they
obtained the Soverain Power (as the Amazons had done before them) and for many
years managed all Affairs of State, Celebrated by Raphael Volateranus, li. 7.
Geograph.
offensive and defensive, without the Advice or Council of any Men whatsoever.

Zenobia, Queen of the Palinyrians, after the Death of her Husband Odenatus,
took upon her the Imperial Regency; and among other Warlike Actions, made the
Kingdom of Syria Tributary to her; nor wanted she Courage to take up Arms
against Aurelianus, the Roman Emperor, but had the misfortune to be overcome,
and led captive in Triumph to Rome; but when it was objected to Caesar by some
of his Friends (who certainly was a Friend likewise to that Sex) as a Dishonor
and Reproach to Triumph over a Woman; he answered, it was no Disgrace at all,
being over such a Woman, as excelled most Men in Masculine Virtue: of whom
Pontanus makes honorable mention, Qualis and Aethiopum quondam sitientibus arvis
In Fulvum Regina Gregem, etc.


Artemisia Queen of Caria, after the Death of her Husband, was admired all over
Greece, who, not only in a Naval Expedition overcame the invading Rhodians; but
pursued them, even to their own Coast, and took possession of the Island,
amidst whose Ruins she caused her own Glorious Statue to be erected; of
Herodotus. whom the Greek Historian says farther; I cannot sufficiently admire
at this Martial Queen, who unintreated, or uncompell'd, followed the Expedition
of Xerxes against Greece, out of her own Courage and Excellency of Spirit, in
which War she furnished five Ships at her own Charge, in the great Sea Fight,
near Salamine; to behold which Battle Xerxes had retired, and stood but as a
Spectator: and Justin says, lib. 2. there was to be seen in Xerxes Womanish
Fear, and in Artemisia Male Audacity; for she demeaned her self to the
Consternation of all Men; of whose Vessels the King taking special notice (not
knowing to whom they belonged) nor in whose management they then were; one
spoke to the King and said; Great Lord, behold you not how bravely the Queen
Artemisia bears her self this day? the King could not at first believe, that
such Resolution could be in that Sex; but at length (notwithstanding her brave
Service) he perceived his Navy put to flight, said sighing; My Men this day
have showed themselves Women, and there is but one Woman among them, and She
has showed her self a Man.

When the Sabines demanded Roman Women in Marriage, with their Swords in their
hands to revenge a Refusal, the wise Senate was puzzled for an Answer in such a
case, where a denial would beget a certain War, or a Grant Hazard their State,
because their Alliance was but a Color to make themselves Masters of Rome.
Tutola, being very young, presented her self with her Advice (which at first
surprised them, but afterward succeeded to the Glory of the Romans and shame of
the Strangers) and after she perceived a great Irresolution in the Discourse of
so many old Senators, whom Experience should have furnished with good Council;
proposed this, that they would agree to their demands and dress up their Maids
like Brides, and so carry them to the Sabines, who preferred their Pleasure
before their Designs of making War; these Slaves, seeing their pretended
Husbands in a sound sleep, subtly stole away their Armor, and advertised the
Roman Soldiers thereof, by a lighted Torch, who came upon them, and carried
away a Victory, wherein Fortune had no part. One cannot praise enuf the
Courage, Montague's Accompl. Women p. 57. 58.
Conduct, and Affection of Tutola, who found an expedient for the
Commonwealth, when the whole Senate and Nation could find nothing, but Fear
and Apprehension.

The same Author says farther, p. 324, 325. As for Fortitude, which the Male
Bragadochios think entailed on the Breeches, the Women of Argos will soon
confute that vain Conceit; who, upon the instigation of a Valiant She-Wit and
Poetess, Telesilla by name, took up Arms, maintained the Walls and repelled the
Enemy with great loss. Was not here both Mercury and Mars, Wit, Valor, Poetry
and Fortitude, and all in long Coats? And it is observable what Solemnity they
kept in Memory of this valiant Enterprise, namely the Hybristica sacra, in
plain English, their upbraiding Festivals, wherein the Women wore the Breeches,
and the Men their Wives Apparel.

What Resolution did the French Ladies show at the Siege of Beauvais (which was
part of the Glory of the Victory) Anno 1472. Grimston's History of Lewis the
11th.
When they presented themselves valiantly, and more than Man-like upon the
Walls, casting Wildfire, Stones, scalding Oil, and Water upon the Enemies, and
so Repulsed Charles Duke of Burgundy with his Forces: nay, there was to be seen
in the Jacobins Church at Beauvais, an Ensign, which a Woman, Joan Foucquet by
name, wrested out of an Ensign-bearers hands, who had gained the top of the
Walls. This demonstrates, that Virtue makes no distinction of Sexes, and that
there are Women to be found who may teach Men both to Live and Dye.

In Plato's Commonwealth Women are called to Politic and Military Charges, and
Antisthenes made no difference between Masculine and Feminine Virtue. Nay, the
Ladies of Aquileia deprived themselves of their only Ornament, A Town in Italy.
their Hair, and gave it to be used in an Exigency, for Bow-strings, against
the Emperor Maximinus; and the Roman and Marcellian Dames did the same.

Cyrus, King of Persia, (whom the Greek Historian makes the Pattern of all
Monarchs) relied upon the Prudent Advice of his Wife Aspasia, Xenophon.
yet after he had conquered the Kingdom of the Medes, and all Asia, having
Reigned happily the space of nine years, waged War against Thomyris Queen of
Scythia, lost 100000 Men in two Battles, and at last was overthrown, and taken
Prisoner by the Queen her self, and put to death, in Revenge of her Son
Spargapices, whom he had slain in Battle; whereupon the French Poet sings thus;
Roncard.
Les Femmes ont pass les Hommes de leur Age,
En Puissance, en Conseil, en Prudence en Courage;
Monstrans a leur Sujects de parole and fait
La Virtue de leur Sex, Invincible and Parfait.


Amalaunta, the Learned and Heroic Queen of the Ostrongoths, and Daughter to
Theodoric, reduced the State of the Goths to a good Condition, Reformed the
Disorders and Corruption that her Father introduced, and left among them,
expelled the Germans and Burgundians out of Italy, and Reigned very Fortunately
several Years.

Penthisilea, Queen of the Amazons, succeeded Orythia, she was present in the
Trojan War, and took their part against the Grecks; and as Justin gives her
Testimony, Inter fortissimos Viros magna ejus Virtutis Documenta extitere. She
is no where mentioned, but with the Preface of Honor and Virtue, and is always
advanced in the Head of the worthiest Women. Diodorus Siculus, Hist. 1.2. makes
her the Daughter of Mars; she was Renowned in her Death likewise, to have it by
the hand of Achilles, of which the Poet Propertius, 1.3. Eleg. 10. sings this
Triumph; Aurea cui postquam nudavit cassida frontem,
Vicit Victorem candida Forma Virum.


Celebrated by Daniel in his History, etc.
Boadicia, or Voadicia, by some called Bunduica and Bunduca, who, since she was
born at home, we will first honor her with a Homebred Testimony, from the Grave
and Diligent Spencer, in his Ruins of Time, -- Bunduca Britones,
Bunduca, the Victorious Conqueress.
That lifting up her brave Heroic Thought
'Bove Women's Weakness, with the Romans fought;
Fought, and in Field against them thrice prevailed, etc.


This Amazonian Queen was the Widow of Prasutagus, King of the Iceni (the
ancient Inhabitants of Cambridge, Suffolk, Norfolk and Huntingtonshire) a Great
and Rich Prince; who, at his Death, left Nero his Heir and his two Daughters;
hoping thereby to free his House from injuries; but it fell out contrary: for
no sooner was he dead, but his Kingdom was spoiled by the Roman Centurions, his
House Ransac't by Slaves, his Wife cruelly beaten and his Daughter fordidly
ravished; besides the chief Men of the Iceni (as if the whole Region had bin
given up as a prey) were deprived of their Goods by Violence, and his Kinsmen
esteemed as Slaves and Captives. With which contumely, and fear of greater
mischief, they conspire with the Trinobantes (the Inhabitants of Middlesex and
Essex) and others, not yet inured to Servitude, to resume their Liberty; and
firstset upon the Garrison of the Veteran Soldiers (whom they most hated)
defeated the 9th Legions. whereof they slew all the Foot; put Cerealis the
Legate and Leander to flight, and put to the Sword 70000 Romans, with their
Associats inhabiting the municipal Town Camelodunum, now Walden, as also London
and Verulam, before Suetonius, the Governor of the Province, could assemble
the rest of the dispersed Forces, to make head against their Army conducted by
Boadicia; who (with her two Daughters, brought into the Field to move
Compassion and Revenge) incites to the noble and manly work of Liberty; which
to recover she protests to hold herself there, but as one of the Vulgar
(without weighing her great Honor and Birth) resolved to conquer, or dye: many
of their Wives did likewise appear in the Camp to encourage their Husband's
Valor; but, in the end, Suetonius got the Victory, with the slaughter of 80000
Britains; Voadicia seeing this fatal overthrow of her, was notwithstanding
unvanquished in her own undaunted and invincible Spirit; and scorning to be a
Spectacle in their Triumphs, or a Vassal to their Will, after the example of
Cleopatra, she put a period to her Misery and Life by Poison.

You may see her Harangues to her Soldiers made by Annal. 1.14.
Tacitus, the Historian, wherein is expressed the magnitude of her Spirit,
thirsting honorably after the Redemption and Liberty of her Country; and Joh.
Xiphilinus in Epist. in Neron. does honest her besides with a particular and
honorable Mention; Bunduica, Britannica Foemina, orta Stirpe Regia etc.
Bunduica, a British Lady, of Royal Extract; one, who not only presided over
them, but also administered all military Affairs, whose Spirit was rather Viril
then Feminine; and afterward, Foemina forma honestissima, Vultu severo; a Woman
of a comely Presence, but severe Aspect, all which does contribute the more to
her true Praise, because it proceeded from the Mouth of the Romans, her Enemies.

Pasquier in his Recherches de la France, says, lib. 6. ca. 33. I will not pry
into Antiquity; do but observe what has passed in Europe during thirty five
years; five or six great Kingdoms governed by Women; France by Katharin De
Medici, Queen Mother; England by Queen Elizabeth, Scotland by Mary, Portugal
fallen into the hands of the Infanta, Daughter of Queen Leonora; Navarre and
Bearn by the Queen Joanna, and finally Flanders and other low Countries by the
Duchess of Parma, Bastard Sister to Philip King of Spain: To enumerat the
particulars on this Subject, would swell this into too great a Volume:
Therefore I shall not trouble you with Queen Elizabeth at home, whose story is
too Prolix and too generally known; only take this character of her and the
Lady Jane Gray by the learned Lady Anna Maria Schurman (of whom more hereafter)
J'oserois opposer une seule Elizabet ensa vie, Reine d'Angleterre, and une Jane
Gray a toutes les illustres Femmes de la Greece and de la Rome encienne; I durst
bring one sole Elizabeth, in her life Queen of England, and one Jane Gray in
opposition to all the Illustrious Dames of ancient Greece and Rome. I have bin
more copious in this Subject than any, to prove that most robust and rugged
Virtue of Fortitude is as eminent in Women as Men; but I will conclude with
that of the Philosopher (tho one of the greatest of Enemies to Women) who
having given testimony, Aristotle. 2 l. politic.
that he preferred Truth before Hatred, confesses, that Women did manage,
among the Lacedaemonians, the Affairs of greatest importance. It is a Custom
false and unjust, not ancient, to reject Women from Public and particular
Government, as if they were fit for nothing but to stitch or spin; their Wit is
adapted for more elevated Actions; and if one will make Remarks upon what they
have done, it may be judged, without difficulty, what they are capable of
doing: If Men sometimes would take their Advice, whom God has given for their
Help and Consolation in their Affairs; it is probable they would have a happier
success in their Enterprises, and these ensuing Examples do sufficiently and
apparently justify that those Praises we bestow upon that Sex are not ill
grounded; but we have Reason to maintain, that their Prudence has often bred
Remedy to the most desperate Diseases of States, Republics and Kingdoms.

Of learned Women and their Affection to Learning and learned Men.
NIcostrate, the Mother of Evander, was the first that taught the Latins their
Letters.

Pericles was admirable in Eloquence and Valiant in Arms; Plutarch in the Life
of Pericles.
but he had Teaching, Education and Eloquence from his noble and beautiful
Mistress Aspatia; afterward his Wife.

Pythagoras and Aristippus confess, that they received their chiefest Secrets
in Philosophy from Theoclea. Polla Argentina, the Wife of Lucan and Statius,
both noted Poets, was so learned, that she corrected their Books, namely, the
three first of the Pharsalian War, and the first Book of Statius.

Areta Corvina, exceeding skilful in Poesy, and has surpassed Pindar, the
Prince of Greek Lyric Poets in the Opinion of some Critics; she wrote five
Books of Epigrams.

Hippatia, Wife of Isidore, wrote many Books in Astrology, Socrates lib. 11.
ca. 10. Hist. tripart.
openly taught Philosophy, and many Sciences in Alexandria, had many Auditors.
Suidas.

Dama the Daughter of Pythagoras, excelled in Philosophy, and showed her
Wisdom and Learning in commenting upon her Father's Books.

Sosipatra, a Lady of Ladies, she was skilful in all sort of Learning, and in
all Sciences, insomuch that she was said to be engendered of a Deity.

Lesbia wrote a Poem in the Doric Dialect, which is thought to contend with
Homer for the Excellency of the Verse.

Caia Affrania, Wife to Lucius, was so fit for, and skilled in Law, that she
pleaded often before many Magistrates.

Clandia Ruffina, a British Lady, skilled in the Tongues celebrated by the
Epigrammatist. Martial. l. 11.


Sappho, the Lesbian, from whom came the Sapphic Verses; she taught Scholars,
had three Female Pupils, and wrote four Lyric Books, Epigrams, Elegies, Iambics
and Menias. The Romans erected her a Statue in Porphiry, richly wrought, to
perpetuate her Memory.

Endocia, the Wife of Theodosius the younger, and Daughter of Leontius, the
Athenian Sophister, called Athaenais, before she was baptized into the Christian
Religion, and married to the Emperor, then she was called (...); because, tho
she was born of mean Parentage, yet for the famous Qualifications, both of her
Body and Mind, she so pleased the Emperor, that he took her into his Bed, and
made her his Wife. She left and Octateuch written in Heroic Verse, so called
from the number of Books, which she wrote, and they were eight. Photius
extremely commends this Work; She also made a Metrical Metaphrasis of Daniel
and Zecariah the Prophets, and three Books in Verse in Praise of the Blessed
Martyr Cyprian.

Olympias, a Thebaness, and famous Physicianess.

Trota, or Trotula, of Salerno, a Town in Italy, a noble She-Physician, who
wrote a Treatise of the Diseases incident to Women, and their Cure.

Aloysia Sigea, a Spanish Lady, versed in five Languages, Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
Syriac and Chaldee.

Cassandra, a very learned Venetian Maid; Politian writes a whole Epistle in
her Commendation. Certum est enim, says he, Ep. li. 3. Ep. 13. non minus ad
came invisendam, quam ad Livium nostrum Patavinum olim ab ultimis Orbis partibus
confluxisse plurimos, qui sui seculi Ornamentum, sexus Miraculum, and Ingenii
monstrum depraedicabant. It Is most certain that very many Persons came from the
most remote Parts of the World to see her, no less then our Patavinian Livy,
who did speak her to be the Ornament of her Age, the Miracle of her Sex, and a
Monster of Ingenuity.

Annas Comnenas, Empress of the East, a learned Woman; she wrote eight Books
called (...), de Rebus a Patre Jestis in Greek.

Corinna, there were three learned Women of that name, the first a Theban, who
is reported to have overcome Pyndar, the Prince of Greek Lyric Poets, five
times, and to have put forth five Books of Epigrams; of whom Propertius makes
mention: the second a Thespian, much celebrated by the Ancients; the third
flourished in the time of Ovid, and was most dear to him.

Margaret Queen of Navar, Sister to Francis the first; there are her Memoires
in public; together with her Poetical Works.

Anna Maria Schurman, a learned Woman, whom Spanheim calls ultimum Naturae in
hoc Sexu Conatum, and decimam Musam, etc. The Dernier Effort of Nature in that
Sex, the tenth Muse, etc. a Dutch Maid. She has published her Works in Hebrew,
Greck, Latin, French, Prose and Verse, in the third Edition of which Book, in
the end, there are diverse Elogia of her by Learned Men: the loss of whose being
out of Town (that is from Vtrecht) Edward Brown, Physician to our King, seems
to bewail, and to content himself with her Picture, drawn by her own hand, with
this Inscription.

Cernitis hic picta nostros in Imagine Vultus.
Si negat Ars formam, Gratia Vestra dabit.
Elizabeth Weston, a learned English Gentlewoman, commended by two of the
greatest Wits of our late Modern Age, Joseph Scaliger, and Janus Dousa. She
has written a Book of Poesy; entitled Parthenion, who admired her, as they
say, before they had the Happiness to be acquainted with her.

Margaret More, Daughter of Sir Thomas More, attained that Skill in all
Learning and Languages, that she became the Miracle of her Age; Forreiners took
such Notice hereof, that Erasmus Dedicated some Epistles to her; No Woman that
could speak so well, spoke so little; whose Secrecy was such, that her father,
Lord Chancellor of England, entrusted her with his most important Affairs,
such was her skill in the Fathers, that she corrected a depraved place of St
Cyprian: for whereas it was corruptly written, nisi vos Sinceritatis, she
amended it Nervos Sinceritatis. This is acknowledged by two eminent Authors,
Costerus and Pamelion on that place; nay farther, she translated Eusebius out
of the Greek; and Mr. Fuller has placed them among the English Worthies; Nay,
his three Daughters were all so Learned, that Erasmus says he found them so
perfect in Livy, that the worst Scholar of them was able to expound him quite
through, without Hesitation, except some places of extraordinary difficulty.
Quod me vel mei similem esset moraturum; which might puzzle me, or one as
knowing as my self.

Besides, within Memory, our Nation has produced four Sisters, the Daughters
of Sr. Anthony Coke, Fuller's Worthies.
rare Poetesses, skilful in Latin and Greek, besides many other excellent
Qualities, eternized already by the Golden Pen of Buchanam, with many other
incomparable Ladies and Gentlewomen in our Land.

One example, or two, of their Affection to Learning and learned Men, and so we
will dispatch this Subject.

Octavia, the Sister of Augustus Caesar, bestowed upon Virgil, out of her
Affection to his Parts, five thousand French Crowns, for writing twenty six
Hexameters in commendation of her Son Marcellus, that should have bin Heir to
the Empire; all which you may have for nothing in the latter end of the sixth
Book of Aeneids.

Hipsicratea, a Lady highly descended, whose Veins housed no common Blood, so
fair, that the blushing Morn never appeared more fresh, nor Venus with more
charms than she; and to accomplish all, endowed with great Estate; yet she was
so taken in love with a Philosopher for his Virtues, named, Crates, a deformed
Person, of a withered, Autumnal Face, with a Wainscot Complexion, and reduced
to the proverbial want of Poverty, that she endured many hardships (having
nothing to accompany her, but the poor comfort of Calamity, Pity) in following
him through Europe and other Places, poorly clothed, Vagabond like, and
barefooted.

It is also reported Franc Belforest Hist. An. 1430.
of Magdalen Queen of France, and Wife to Lewis the eleventh (a Scottish Woman
by Birth) that taking the Fresco in an Evening Promenade, with her Ladies of
Honor, she accidentally spied M. Alanus, one of the Kings Chaplains, an
infirm, superannated, grim Visag'd and deformed Man; ( Erat antum (says the
Author) foede deformis et ea forma qua citius pueri terreri possent, quam invit
ari ad Osculum Puellae) fast a sleep, reposed in a shady Bower, and bestowed a
ravishing kiss upon him ( Osculum imperio dignum, a Kiss worth an Empire; one
such Kiss would ravish a Man from the Jaws of Death. Suaviolum Stygia sie te de
valle reducet) Secun. Bas. 13. at which the brisk and sprightly Court-Ladies
smiling, she replied, that it was not his Person, which she did embrace and pay
that deference unto, but, with a Platonic Love to the divine Beauty of his
Soul; deformis iste etsi videatur Senex, divinum Animum habet; thus has Virtue
and Learning bin admired, nay adored by Women, and she one of the highest
Sphere too, a noble and learned Queen.

Having thus given you, by the saint Shadowings of my Pen, the Perfections of
the Female Sex, I must close all with this Corollary; If Virtue, Chastity,
Continency, Learning, Love of Learned Men, Honesty, Integrity, Piety, Valor,
Conduct, or Management of Ecumenical, as well as Political Affairs, Patience,
or any moral Virtue whatsoever, can persuade Rational Man (so void of Reason
(pardon the Expression) in libelling that harmless and ingenious Sex) to a
Retractation; I think the Arguments here used may prevail; if not, I am
satisfied with this, that I shall gain (I dare not say merit) their Favor, and
value not the Sarcasms or Satyrs of the most capping Momi or Zoili of this Age.

FINIS.
Books printed for Ja. Norris at the Kings-Arms without Temple Bar, 1683.

1. MAssinello; or a Satyr against the Association, and the Guild Hall Riot.
Quarto. 2. Eromena, or, The Noble Stranger: a Novel. Octavo. 3. Tractatus
adversus Reprobation Absolutae Decretum, Nova Methodo and succentissimo
Compendio adornatus; and in duos Libros digestus. Octavo. 4. An Idea of
Happiness; in a Letter to a Friend, enquiring wherein the Greatest Happiness
attainable by Man does consist. Quarto. 5. A Murnival of Knaves, or Whiggism
plainly Displayed, and, if not shameless, Burlesqu'd out of Countenance.
Quarto.

