A Moderate ANSWER To certain Immoderate QUAERIES Laid down in a printed Paper,
entitled,

A Brief Relation, containing an Abreviation of the Arguments urged by the late
Protector against the Government of this Nation by a King; etc.

To convince men of the danger and inconvenencie thereof.

Published for the good and information of Parliament, Army and people.

By ^harles Noble Gent. an Honorer of his present Highness and Parliament, and
a great Lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in (...)

To the Reader.
IT is a wise man's counsel, (and the wisest that ever wore mortality, and was
no more then man) My son, meddle not with them that are given to change; the
word in the Original bears a larger signification, as meddle not with those
that are seditious, those that affect alterations and novelties. So that had I
not taken up, and put on a serious and a solemn purpose and determination, to
answer (to the utmost of my abilities) all such Papers as shall come to public
view, that may any ways savor of these seditious Novelties; I had laid this
by, as being fitter for a silent contempt and slighting, then for any other
replying. Yet when I considered that this, though it were but as a piece of
Cork floating upon the Waves, yet it might bear up and bring with it an unseen
Net that may catch and entangle some unsettled and unstable silly souls; and
though it may be but as the Foam upon the Waters, as the Froth of the Sea, yet
it may beget a Venus, an Idol that the inconsiderate vulgar may adore:
Therefore I deemed it not amiss to lay to all my strength and force to cut off
all these Hydra's heads as fast as any of them shall appear. And here upon the
whole, it may not unfitly be inferred, what Bildad said of old to Job; Can the
Rush grow up without Mire? or can the Flag grow without Water? Can these rushy
and sedgy expressions that are set down in this Paper grow any where, but from
marish, myrie grounds and principles? Or can the Flags that here spring up,
(whose original comes from an Hebrew radix that signifies a brother, because
Flags do usually grow up as in a brotherhood together) can they intend any
other end or purpose then to make up a Party, or to contract and beget a
brotherhood that may abet and uphold the same sense and opinion that this Paper
holds forth? It Is much beyond the probability of a bare conjecture, that some
such testy and untoward designment, is the projection that is aimed at. But his
remembrances (as Job speaks) are as ashes, they are not only some vile and
contemptible remainders of some better matter, (as of wood or the like) as
ashes are, but they are also sullyings and discolorings of the sacred memory of
the dead, and that of no meaner a Person then of his late Highness: Him whom
alive, he durst not look upon but with consternation and abashment, and whose
Virtues, no less then Magnanimities, were so singular, so signal and so
exemplar; his Ashes he pollutes with his, his blessed dust he most inhumanely
does rake in, and rake up, with set purpose to dim and blind some weak and
rolling eyes. but this Deportment, J hope, will meet with no better success,
then they can have who spit against the wind, whose filth will return in their
own faces. But he sets a print upon the heels of his feet, as the holy Language
has it, he takes measure of every word, and of every action, and marks his
steps to find where he trod awry: when his gate was wholly upright and full of
integrity, he weighs not the urgencies and necessities of State, which must be
full of eyes, and look every ways; and like a fair and a strait staff, which
if one thrust half way in the water it may seem to contract a curvity, when in
truth it is still the same: So reasons of State lie in the water (as it were)
to common eyes, and there may appear to such eyes strange and unthought of
irregularities, like the windings and meanders of a Brook, that may seem to run
contrary ways, when the streams tend directly and through the most convenient
Channels, (though with some seeming circuitings) to the Ocean.

I have been the longer in this Preface to the Reader, in regard that I shall
say but little to half that the printed Paper speaks on, in which is laid down
the abreviation of those Arguments, (as he says) used by his late Highness
against the Government of these Nations by a single Person; and shall conclude
with one Quere before I come to the answer of his Queries, which is briefly
this. May we not take these bold disputes and questiongs, as pushings at the
feet of his present Highess, as the Scripture has it? May not we fear that by
these proceedings we may be brought too soon to say, Where is the House of the
Princes? May we not fear that though at first there may be but a seeming
leakage, and a little breach upon the banks of our hopes in our present most
illustrious Governor, yet that if there be no sudden stoppage made, that there
may be a wider breaking in of many and turbulent Waters both upon him and us?
and that there may be a crowding, and an impetuous rolling in of more such
Waters, that may even deluge us all? But that God that only stills the raging
of the Sea, and calms the billows thereof when they cast up mire and dirt, let
him allay and calm the Tumult, and the murmuring of such People also.

The Answer to the Brief Relation, containing the Abbreviation of the Arguments
used by the late Protector, etc.
FOr the Arguments, though they are not in the absolute terms (as he says) yet
in the genuine sense as the late Protector laid them down, I shall not spend
much time upon them: First because it is in the dark to me, whether there were
ever such Arguments in very deed and in truth or no. And secondly, if there
were, because the rise and ground of all his ensuing Quaere's being hinged upon
those Arguments, I giving solution to them, shall give therewith an Answer (if
not a satisfaction) to any thing that may be further raised from thence. Only
thus much I cannot but say, that the time and the season alters the face of
things very much, and that which may be denied of special use and concernment
at one time, upon a further cribation and trial may not be found so useful and
concerning at another: So that the conjunction of State Affairs, as alfo the
Experimentals that have been made by those in high places what kind of
Government would best go down and relish with the nature and constitution of
this Nation, it having been also exactly viewed and weighed, and diligently
considered by the Patriots of this Nation, what would most properly suit, and
be most adequate and most consentaneous to the general genius of this Island,
as to the best form to establish a Government in, that might have in it most of
duration and most of utile and dulce too; 'Twas given up by a general vote and
consent, that this our present Government as it is now settled, was the best. If
that has been the ultimate and last Result of the Grandees of our Nation, who
laid out themselves to the utmost in their studyings and contrivements for the
peace and settlement of their Country, (wherein their own welfares and concerns
were enrolled and bound up) why is there then the voice of grudging and
repining heard? Or why is there darkening of counsel by words without
knowledge? Or why should the Author go about to lead our Counselors away
spoiled, and make our Judges fools?

So then, let there be from henceforward a slumbering of all animosities, and a
dead sleep cast upon all exasperating and enviously fermented language: Let us
hear no more of these expressions, which like flints carry secret sparks of
fire in them, such as are these; The mystery of iniquity going to be settled by
a Law, (I suppose meaning our present Government.) And further (he speaks it to
the Reader) 'twill cost thee hot service and sorrow of heart to redeem thy self
and Country. Were not the Jews of old wiser in their generation, then some are
now in ours? They in the whole time of their Passover never named the word
lechem, i. bread, lest they should ftir up a desire in their children to
leavened bread, which during the Passover was absolutely forbidden: Why is
there not that prudence, and circumspection, and wariness in our times used now
also? that having had enough of War and garments rolled in blood, that now at
last there should not so much as a word or a whisper be used or taken up, that
may have the least shadow of any tendencie that way? But there are some
restless and dissatisfied spirits that will not long be contented with any
thing, but like waiward children that cry for a thing they see, which when they
have in their hands they throw it away, and cry on still. Of such a querulous
temper are those that are opinionated, as the Author of this Paper is, who
cannot at all palliate his dislikings with moderate and beseeming words; but
falls on with -- Fawning Courtiers, and Deceived Englishmen, and Calumnious
aspersiens of Court-Parasites, and such like unseasoned and unsalted speeches,
that can administer no satisfaction to the Reader.

So that now I shall directly come to his eight Queries one by one, as they are
laid down, and shall begin with that other Quere which he first lays down,
before the eight, which he makes to be a Quere upon the whole, and so shall
conclude with his conclusion, when I shall have viewed and answered to what is
there set down.

Upon the whole I Quere, Whether any man upon rational grounds can expect that
the present Protector or single Person (pretending to Government) should be
more honest, righteous and just then his deceased Father was?

As some plants will not grow but in the shade, and as some fruits ripen not
but in frosts, and as it is said of the black thorn, that it blossoms not but
in a storm; so here is a discovery of such a spirit, that delights in the shades
and darknesses of others virtues; here is a fresh apparition of that old evil
Spirit, that had its chief contentment to dwell among the Tombs; and from
thence comes forth and endeavors to infest and asperse the reputation,
righteousness and justness of the living: And whilst he says, Can any man
expect that the present Protector should be more honest, etc. then his deceased
Father was? does he not thereby infer, that there was and is a defect of these
virtues both in the one and the other? And when he says, The single person
(pretending to Government) with a Parenthesis, does he not intend it an
absolute Parenthesis, and verily believes that the sense (the sense that he
means) would be very good, (and to his opinion very much better) if that was
quite left out. And whilst he says, pretending to Government, does he not
thereby conclude, that there is only a pretense to this Government? So that
it is not at all umbragious, but very conspicuous, that the establishment of the
Civil Government, both as it was, and as it is, both in the deceased Father,
and the surviving Son, is grumbled at, and quarrelled with. But I shall
conclude this, because I shall meet with more of it hereafter, with two stories
that will pretty well suit with the two Persons the Author seems to take
offense and trouble at; The first is of the Great Talbot that was the fright
and terror to the French; who being dead, and laid under a stately monument,
the French King in process of time was instigated to deface his Effigies, and
to take up his dust and bones, and throw them into a River; No, says the King,
we durst not look on his face when he was alive, we will therefore let him
alone when he is dead: This might caution the Author to let our great Hero
alone now he is dead, on whose face he durst not look when he was alive.

The other Story is of the noble Athenian; There was in Athens an Election to
be made of a Governor, this noble Athenian was put in nomination, 'twas
agitated and put to the scrutiny; some objected against him (and said) he will
do little good to his Country, he will mind his pleasures and delights too
much to mind that, and such like words: Yet in fine, the vote went for him,
and he was elected to the chief Government; when he was settled there, Now, says
some of his Courtiers, is the time that you may be revenged of those that
opposed and stood against your Election, and said, that you would never do good
to your Country: No, says the noble Athenian, I shall take no other revenge
upon them but this, I will live and govern so, that I will prove them all
Liars. Such cross and untoward arguings have been made against his present
Highness, and such, if no worse does this querying Paper hold forth, and such
as believe what this Paper speaks will not be backward to say, that this our
Noble Athenian will do little good for his Country: But you shall see what a
gallant revenge he will take upon these Detractors, He will Rule and Govern so,
with such Righteousness, with such Justice (and long may he so Rule and Govern)
as that he will prove them all Liars. Now to the Queries.

I. I would Quere first, Whether the late Protector did not work over his
Council to some things illegal?

Here is a departing from the old Rule, De mortuis nil nisi bonum, Of the dead
we should say nothing but good; and here is not only that that is not good,
but that which is not true; never was his Council wrought over to any thing
illegal: besides, here is a low and a vile esteem secretly laid upon those
Counselors, which like leaden Rules in his opinion, might be so easily made to
stand bent any ways; it is certainly a bold and a very segacious presumption, to
infer (as the Author does by this Quere) that the late Protector did work over
his Council to some things illegal, which neither he nor they, nor any one else
can discern, so as to discribe or give a name to them, so that when I have
said, that such reproachful things, may amuse and stagger some weak
judgments, and put them to gazings, and to doubtful standings in their
thoughts, that this was the very end and purpose in the Author.

Quere 2. Whether Kings formerly, and the Protector lately did not wax wanton,
and providing for some few of their Creatures, neglect the Commonalty?

What Kings formerly did, is not to come now into any dispute; but by the
Authors linking of them together, I suppose that I deem not much awry, that
it is in his projection to bring a disgust, and an odium upon the one as well as
the other; and since that of Kingship has been decryed, and has met with its
doom and determination, is it not more then conjectural, that it is in the
wishes and hopes of some, that the Protectorship shall meet with a speedy,
though not with the same exit; and how the late Protector did wax wanton, I
think it is not in any man's power reasonably to make out, and for providing for
any of his creatures, (as he call them) never heard of any Sommerset or
Buckingham that he had: And for the neglecting the Commonalty, a thousand
gladded mouths will speak the contrary, Did he not always deliver the poor
that cried unto him? Did he not relieve and comfort the fatherless, the
husbandless, and him that had none to help him? Did not the blessings of them
that were ready to perish come upon him? And did he not often cause the widows
hearts to sing for joy? And so I shall pass from his Quere and the
spightfulness that is couched in it, and come to the next, with the slanderous
scandal that is in that.

Quere 3. Whether our late experience of a single Person cannot testify, that
though for a small time he seemed to favor honest men and things, yet when he
thought himself seated, whether I say, he did not then slight both them and it,
and become a Favorer of the contrary? And whether our late Court did not show
more growth and increase of Rogues, Bauds and Whores, then in all the time of
our Government by a Commonwealth:

Here Is a home-thrust as with an envenomed poniard; here are poisonous arrows
shot, even bitter words; and the yet fresh, and precious, and blessed memory of
his late Highness is stabbed and wounded with insufferable obloquies. Scandala
Magnatum was of old a heinous thing; it was so highly criminal, that it always
wore a most severe and signal mulct: And the toleration that it seems to make
use of in this and some such printed Papers, I believe is usurpt and stolen,
rather then any ways else indulged or licensed. For a small time (says he) the
late Protector seemed to favor honest men and things. How small a time? Indeed
the whole time of his Protectorship (being well near about that which Jacob
served Laban for Rachel) seemed but a few days. But does he mean that? No, says
he, When he thought himself seated, he slighted both them and it, and became a
favorer of the contrary. So that here is a double charge; here is a laying by and
a disrespect, a discountenancing, a discouraging, a forsaking of his Friends,
whom I suppose he intends by honest men; and here is an adhesion to, an
embracing, and a falling in with (as he says) and a favoring of the contrary.
So that this forked arrow wounds dangerously and doubly, and like a
pestilential contagion fastens upon the very vitals and seat of life (as it
were) of that so much renowned person, which is his honor; to render him
wavering and unstable, to render him a person given to vacillation and
changings, and to charge him with neglects and slightings and disregardings to
his friends, or honest men or things; what greater vilipendings, what lower or
meaner thoughts or words, or more dishonorable, can be cast upon any man?

For the rest of his so broad, and foul, and unhandsom, and unbecoming
language, I shall pass that by, as people do by ill and offensive scents, with
an aversion and flopping of the nose: And shall say only thus much of his late
Highness's Family, (which he so much vilifies and postpones to the Chimera's of
a fancied Commonwealth) That it may be truly said of his Economy, what was
said of George Prince of Anhalt's household, that there was in it Ecclesia,
Academia and Curia; And of his late Highness his person (of whom it may be
said, as the Jews did of Moses, that his soul was sucked out of his mouth by God
as it were with a kiss) of his person I may say, as one being asked what a kind
of man Basil was, he presented him with a Pillar of Fire with this Motto, Talis
est Bafilius: And such a Talis was his late Highness, all on a fire with a
fervencie and an unquench'd zeal for the honor of God, and the good of his
Country.

Quere 4. Whether a Confederacy has not been made abroad with our secret
Enemies at home, that so a single Person might the better suppress those that
see the wickedness of his designs.

What wicked design this may be, and what that Confederacy is that he speaks
on, that has been made a broad with secret Enemies at home, I cannot ghess no
otherwise then by the Authors following words, in the conclusion and winding up
of his Queries, he speaks more plainly there, what he says here but gutterally,
and leaves to conjecture his meaning; I shall therefore pass this over whilst
it is thus muffled, and speak to it, as it is more bare faced, and as I shall
there meet with it in his conclusion, and come to the next Quere.

Quere 5. Whether the single person now pretending to Government, though the
Son of a subtle man, be a wise man, fit to dispose of Commonwealth Treasure.

If he that uses the word Racha (which signifies but pish, or fie, or as other
that derive it from Rec, which signifies empty) lies under so hard a
reprehension that he is in danger of a Council, and if he that says to his
brother, Thou fool, be in danger of Hell fire; what a fearful increpation does
the Author of this Paper lie under, who is guilty of little less then the worst
of those expressions, wherein is contained and couched a most bold, and a most
notorious scandal; a scandal that contains in it all the degrees and
dimensions, and acceptations that a scandal is rendered, or maybe taken in: for
if it be considered, as it is laid down under the word (...), which is a
stumbling stone, it is that; if it be considered, as it is called (...), which
is a gin or a snare,'it is that; or if it be considered as it is termed (...),
which is a sharp stake, it is that also; so that as it is a sharp stake to
offend and wound the reputation and renown, and prudence of his present
Highness, so it is also a stumbling stone, and a gin, and a snare, to entangle
and strapple some feeble judgments, so as to bend them to some kind of
persuasion that ways tending, which should it grow up into a belief, would
prove a fearful and a horrible, as well as a dangerous stone of offense: It Is
therefore well rendered by the Greeks, who when they would show the abhorrency
and the odiousness that they conceived to be in Scandal, that they called
calumny by the name of (...), as, who should say, it was a blasphemy to
calumniate, especially those in high place, whom the Scriptures have termed to
be as Gods.

But I shall hasten from these words, which are as full of ill vapors as those
Fens were, which Hanibal passing through lost his eye, and are of as sulphurous
and stifling a nature, as report gives to be in the Lake Asphaltites, which if
a Bird flies over it, it choaks and kills; and shall leave them wrapped up
together as they be, and shall only add this note in the general, that the
steps of Machiavel are herein followed, who advised, That if any Prince were
disgustfull, to asperse and calumniate him; for says he, adhaerebit aliquid;
no matter for the truth of what is said, slander him, says he, and something
will stick upon him. These things in the late Kings days were looked upon as
of a most dangerous consequence; and therefore said an eminent Divine in those
times, If a Minister pray for the King, so as to send him the Spirit of Wisdom;
to pay for him that he may be temperate, merciful, or just, was in effect to
scandalize him, and to throw abroad a Speaking-Libel of him, and to infer as
much, as if he had plainly said, that he either wanted wisdom, temperance,
justice and mercy, or that he was a departing from them. Certainly, here is as
much and more set down in this Paper then was said then, and surely the
remedies and experiences for the anticipating and preventing and silencing of
such exorbitances, is as requisite and necessary now as ever.

Quere 6. Whether the good people of this Nation be not very sensible of the
expensiveness extraordinary of a single Person more then of a Commonwealth? and
whether they do not find a want of that vast Treasure expended upon Baubles,
Toys, and trifling Gugaes, such as we of late have had too much cause to speak
of? and whether the cause of the Peoples poverty has not been by means of
purchasing Land to the Family of the late Protector, as well as High-Spaniola
Business.

Here Is three things especially found fault withal, That (as he says) has
wasted and expended so much Treasure, and that is 1. Baubles. 2. The purchasing
of Lands; and 3. High-Spaniola Business. By the Baubles, whom he further call
Toys and trifling Gugaes: I do suppose he may have in his eye the solemn and
decent Funeral of his late Highness, and by the disrelishing and slight and
superficial terms that he gives it, it is easily seen how he was affected with
it: But for the pomp of that Funeral, it was no more then the worthiness of his
late Serenity deserved, and the Granduer of the Nation required; And is it not
Recorded of Asa, that he was buried in his own Sepulcher which he had made for
himself in the City of David, and that he was laid in a Bed (you may conceive
it a Bed of Honor) which was filled with sweet odors, and diverse kinds of
spices, prepared by the Apothecaries Art, and they made a very great burning
for him? And if the Scriptures allow of such solemnities, as it is frequent in
them that they do; why is it found fault with, and quarrelled at now,
especially when they give so mean a Character of an obscure Burial, as to call
it the burial of an Ass? For purchasing of Lands to the family of the late
Protector, I think there was no such purchase, (nay I am assured of it) that
might any ways cause the peoples poverty: Treasurers and other Officers to some
late Kings (not to speak of any Officers of nearer times)I am confident have
purchased more to their families, then his late Highness ever did to his. And
for the Hispaniola business, it was a designment and an undertaking of such
noble gallantry, that had it been as well prosecuted and managed, as it was
well advised, contrived and set forth, and had it met with that success as was
very probable and likely that it should, never was there an Achievement from
England set on foot, that could have brought more splendour and glory to this
Nation, then that had done. But this mismanagement or miscarriage of one
Expedition, blasts and effaces the victorious and prosperous successes of many
other, which he that runs may read almost in every place within the bounders of
three whole Kingdoms, with advantage.

But (he says) This Nation is sensible of the expensiveness extraordinary of a
Single person, more then of a Commonwealth. If he means by that Commonwealth
the Long Parliament, (as I suppose he does) it is easily seen what a vast deal
that was more costly: For what they gifted one to another, and what they other
ways expended, as Records will yet show, and the people of this Nation do yet
feel; it is easy to believe that they consumed and wasted more treasure (to
speak no further) then has maintained most of the Kings and their Courts ever
since the Conquest.

Quere 7. Whether the late Person set up, did not judge himself above Law? and
whether he did not tyrannise over men's persons, restraining both them and their
liberties? and whether the mercy be pretended to in the execution thereof, has
not been very cruelty?

So now by this, as what has gone before, hand what follows, may not we think
it high time to wish or look out for David's Harp, or some other Instrument that
may be as efficacious, though not so pleasant, that may appease and lay that
evil and raging spirit that has entered into some such opinionated persons as
this Author seems to be, who we may justly fear may not stick (too soon) to
take up the Javelin, when there is nothing but handfulls of dirt already thrown
upon the sace of the most precious memory of his late Highness.

The late Person (says he) set up, did not he judge himself above Law? From
what premises does he bring in this inference? when in the whole series of his
Government there appears not so much as a personal fault, that was any ways
damageable to the Public: Yet young and Infant-States and Governments must
have strong swadling-bands, which though they may seem stubborn, yet are of
necessary use and concernment. For his Tyrannising over men's persons, and
restraining their liberties, where was there any such action that might justly
have annexed to it such an epethite? And for the mercy he has pretended, to be
very cruelty, this is to spoil him of his chief and most embellished ornament,
and to raze out one of his most Princely Motto's, which had very much affinity
with his Royal genius; and he sat down best contented, when he might show his
delight that he took in Pepercisse rather then Perdidisse. Much of his late
time was taken up with a perpetual war either against his Enemies, or himself,
and he was still Victor over both. In all his government, that that might seem
to bear any semblance of hardness or restraining (as he calls it) might be for
some season under the Major-Generals; and what was then acted, was not beyond
parallels in former days.

Alfred (a little before the Conquest) who was styled the Mirror of Princes,
divided the Land into Shires, Hundreds, and Tythings, so as we find it to this
day; to this end chiefly to prevent any insurrections that might otherwise
happen, and so might justle, if not push down and overthrow a then young and
infant Government; no Englishman then should be deemed to live legally, except
he were of a certain Hundred or Tything, out of which he was not to remove
without security; and if he did remove after such security put in, then all the
Hundred and Tything were fined to the King. And this Law William the Firs, when
he came to think of a secure settlement, found to be better to his turn, then
any that he could devise; and he called it the Borough-Law, wherein the Commons
of every Hundred stood Borough or Surety for each other, and the Master stood
Borough for his Servant. And this Citadel, as it is termed, built for a Guard to
the Public peace, kept the Nation so regularly, that no popular insurrection
was ever heard of before the Conquest. So that the policy of these
Major-Generals might be admitted to subscribe bonum, however some of the
Managers of that Policy in their deportments may have miffed to have it
attested for them that they did it been. But whether this be meant or no by the
Author, I shall not much be sollicitous of; but I am certain, the expressions
here thrown out do deeply wound the Honor of his late Highness: And the
Reputation of Great persons is as the delicate skin that covers some delicate
fruit; if the skin be scratched and plucked off, the fruit will presently
discolor and fall away. So it is time that there should be some care taken of
these bold and rough fingers; and that his late Highness, who was one of the
Glories, as well as the amazements of Princes, and one whom the chief
Potentates of Christendom at one time or other courted, that his memory should
not be suffered to be thus blanched arid trampled on.

Quere 8. Whether the late Single person, to uphold his and his Courtiters
voluptuousness, has not been ready to uphold what Monopolies he found on foot,
and likewise to devise new ways to the same purpose? And whether the Citizen
has not had experience of Court-payment, and the Countryman (though sad) of the
spoiling of his fences, destroying his crop by them that belong to the Court,
and that they please to call their game: And if these be the beginnings, what
will the end be? And therefore for a closure I must say, What shall we say or
do more, then the King-Protector has said or done?

This is to usher in his Conclusion a Muncer redivivus is very visible in both;
he in the confines of Turingia invented a Doctrine contrary to the Roman and
Lutheran both; he fained he had power to depose Princes, and substitute others,
and that all goods should be common, and such like tendencies to popularity, he
put to this an austerity of life, and whilst he seasoned many falsehoods with
some seeming truths, the inconsiderate vulgar, that could not well distinguish
betwixt them, admired, and swallowed all; the sad effects that these things
wrought, the Phlebotomy that wrought the cure, and what is so frequently
recorded of them, can still testify: And how near the Author stears a course
by this compass, any discerning eye may easily judge, and whilst he proceeds in
his so peremptory increpations and directions, he may seem to persuade us to
renounce daylight, to contemplate only, and to study by his candle. But why
is there a redarguing of voluptuousness either in his late Highness or his
Courtiers? certainly, there was more care taken to prevent the least declension
that ways, then any Court in Christendom besides can show.

The truth of this is obvious to any understanding, especially, when it shall
be remembered, that no man has passed without some remarkable punishment, that
has but swerved from that Golden Rule of Temperance, that both his late
Highness and his Household so punctually observed; so that a Detractor is
sometimes a persecution and a scourge to himself; for when he shall lay down
too palpable and too perspicuous shall falsities, it will infringe and cripple
his credit so, that he shall not gain a belief, though he lays down sometimes
truths. I shall pass therefore from his upholding Monopolies that he found on
foot, and his setting up of others, as from things that have no proof with
them, nor have they (with these that follow) any savor or relish, save of
calumniation: For when had the Citizens ever better payment made, then they
have and had from Court? Or where is any Countryman made sad, by his fences
spoiling, or destroying his crop by any Courtiers that follow (as he calls it)
their Game? I believe a horse may be rid to death, (as the saying is) before
such querulous Language shall be heard, though the Author should take the
pains, and go in person instead of his Paper to all the Shires throughout the
Nation; and whereas he may think that he has hit the Nail on the head, when he
has added, What shall we say or do more then the King-Protector has said and
done? If he would but say and do with that moderation and temperature as the
late Protector, but no King, has said and done, there needed not then neither
Queries nor Answers. And so I shall directly pass to the view of his
Conclusion, which when I have done, I shall briefly wind up all, and conclude
also.

And here he begins to unmask, and the Visard that was put upon the fourth
Quere, by the words, Confederacy made abroad with our secret Enemies at home,
is here plucked off; and here he comes to retaile what he bound up there in
gross together, and comes to particularizing, so that we are not left to
uncertain and floating conjectures, he puts it to a serious weighing, Whether
by present Action, and past Management of State Affairs, of some being Lawyers,
etc. (raised from a low estate to sit in Council) and become great Favorites at
Court, it may not be found and clearly seen, that they have a design to bring
in Charles Stuart; For if they bring in a single person, and grant that, the
next dispute will be, whether the one Family or the other has most right; and
who have most interest Charles or Richard, I think asks no long time to
Answer.

Here Is no ventriloquy, or speaking inwardly, or through the teeth, with broken
and half expressions, but here is a down right quarrel to the present and past
management of State Affairs; the mis-actors herein he names to be some Lawyers,
raised from a low estate to sit in Council) and to become great Favorites at
Court; who these are (though it may possibly fall within the bounds of a
probable surmise) yet I shall forbear their names, in regard they cannot be
reasonably deemed to be so imprudent, and so inconsiderate, (not to say
improvident and irrational) as to be so solicitous, and to take up such
indefatigable industries, as to assert that wholly deniable in the Father, which
they might be induced afterward by any overtures to concede and establish in
the Son: Therefore his inference is very improper, and small weight there is in
his words, when he says, It Is clearly seen that they have a design to bring in
Charles Stuart, and his reason he renders is as far from the mark; for (says
he) if they bring in a single Person, and grant that, the next dispute will be,
whether the one Family or the other has most right; and whether Charles or
Richard most interest will ask no long time to answer. To unravel or untie this
knot, 'twill not be amiss to cast an eye backwards some several Centuries of
years, and there we shall find, that the Line Masculine of Normandy expired in
the third Inheritor, as if to begin the fate laid on all the future successes
hitherto, wherein the third Heir in a right descent, seldom or never enjoyed
the Crown of England, but that either by extrusion, usurpation, or extinction
of the male blood, it received an alteration; that so to know whose indubitably
the Right was has pusled Parliaments, and has unsheathed the Sword often to
determine; nay, the last has confuted the foremost, and what the great Council
has settled one ways, dint of sword has established another, and that always
has been held an Argument of such force and efficacy, (and retains the same
virtue still) that it may take up no time at all, to assert whose title's best,
either Richard's or Charle's, for a plucked Rose will quickly wither: There
might be added what the Switch at Croydon might possibly have produced, by
which it might very easily appear with what affection the English did put on
the Scotch Yoke, when they generally reputed King James at the best but a
King-in-law, without any natural affection to this Nation (as one has well
observed) and if we should listen to Parsons the Jesuit, who puts the Infanta
the first, to fourteen titles to the Crown of England, with that of King
James', there would be much to do, to find out so ready an interest as is
talked on to James's grandchild. But I shall leave this Goardian knot as it is
now cut in pieces as by another Alexanders sword, in the hands of the present
Possessor, and shall say upon the whole, that this Paper holds forth, which
being for the most part false suggestions, and so are like false Gems, which
though counterfeit, they may be so set, that they may seem to have one good
light to be seen by; yet that light is but an erroneous and a false one, and
like an ignis fatuus will mislead the followers of it into-perplexing and
fatal, as well as dangerous precipices; and whilst the Author is thus backward,
and behind hand to acknowledge and congratulate his present Highness, Is not
that in effect to withstand and oppose him? and whilst he casts such stumbling
blocks in his way, Is it not to hinder him from standing clear, though he
cannot from standing high? and whilst he blackens and clouds the splendour of
his present Highness, who is in all opinions a precious and a good man, It is
not to induce a persuasion upon some, that he may be deemed to prove a bad
Prince? Is not this (in what he can) the setting of the Nations against him,
(as the Prophet speaks) on every side, that they may spread a net over him
(which God divert) and that they may take him in their pit? Is not this to
build for him the house of the Moath, or to make for him a Booth or a Tent that
may be removed and plucked up at pleasure? Is not this as the East-winde, which
when it touches the Vine, it causes it to wither in all the leaves of its
Spring, as the Scripture speaks? or is it not as a storm to hurl him out of
his place, as Job has it? But let the great God of Heaven, by whom alone Kings
and Princes Reign, let him be his exceeding great Salvation; let him be his
Jehovah Jireth, his Jehovah Nisi; let him be his Lord Protector, and the Lord
his Banner and Shield; and let him bring him from Ribrothbataavah to Hazaroth,
horn these Graves of lustings, to Palaces of Paradices of Rest and Tranquillity;
That he may be like a handful of Corn in the Earth upon the top of the
Mountains; the Fruit whereof shall shake like Lebanon, whilst we his Subjects
(both in City and Country) may flourish, and grow green as grass upon the
Earth; let his prosperous Reign be to us as the Dew is to the tender Herb, that
we may grow up still, and never have cause to fear either a Drought or a Sith,
and that under him we may be delivered from all deceits and impostures, as well
as the violences of men; and that all such Papers, to which this is an Answer,
may become as a dream, that when we awake the image of it may be despised; and
that his Highness (notwithstanding such foul Papers) may meet with a long and a
happy Government, and may become a Prince of all our Affections, as well as all
our Countries, and that he may pass from these Beth-maacahs, or Houses of
bruisings, to lasting Beth-hanans, or Houses of Grace and mercy; and that he
may remain for ever, as a Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, and as a
Royal Diadem; and that he may never be called forsaken, nor his hand be termed
desolate; but that he may be called Heph-zibah, and his Land Beulah, for that
the Lord delights in him; and his Land shall be married.

FINIS.

