HOLY Scripture-Work Is Better than the WORK of The Corrupt REASONING OF FALLEN
MAN.

Secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which are
revealed, belong unto us and to our Children for ever,

Deuteronomy. 29.29. For after that, in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew
not God; it pleased God by the Foolishness of Preaching, to save them that
believe,

1 Cor. 1.21. Woe to the Rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take Counsel,
but not of me; and that Cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit,

Isa. 30.1. The Lord frustrateth the Tokens of the Liers, and makes Diviners
mad; turns Wise Men backward, and makes their Knowledge foolish,

Isa. 44.24, 25. By JOS. NOT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1693.

PREFACE.
REader, by this thou may know, That I have seen a Book with G. T. for
George Troses Name to it, a Preacher amongst the Presbyterians in Exon, Dated
1692. Now this Book of G. T's. was written in Answer to a Book set forth by
Thomas Bampfield, Counselor at Law in Exon, by way of Enquiry, Whether the
Lord Jesus Christ made the World? And also, By way of Vindication of the
Observation of the seventh Day as a Sabbath. I would have the Reader observe,
That I am not concerned to Vindicate T. B's. Book; but to the latter I say, I
am sensible, that Christ the Substance is come, and the Shadows flies away: But
I am concerned to return a Reply to several things in G. T's. Book, for I have
perused it, and have seen the great Error of the Writer, which drew a concern
upon my Mind to write: For, I do admire, that ever a Man, professing
Christianity, should appear in Print in such manifest Opposition to the Holy
Scriptures; and yet of that number that profess the Scripture to be the only
Rule of Faith, etc. But in this we may see the great Confusion of Babels
Builders. I desire the Reader to consider what thou Reads; and if any one
publish any Doctrine contrary to the Holy Scriptures, believe them not; for
Christ bids us, Beware of false Prophets which come in Sheeps Clothing; who
says, Ye shall know them by their Fruits, Matthew. 7.15, 16. And the Apostle
Paul advises us to turn away from such as have a form of Godliness, but denies
the Power, 2 Timothy 3.5. For indeed, another Foundation can no Man lay than that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. And therefore I desire the
Reader to keep thy Mind near to the Light of Jesus Christ, in thy own Heart and
Conscience, that so thou may understand what thou read: For the great
Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from Generations, is Christ within,
the hope of Glory, Col. 1.26, 27. Therefore, to the Spirit of God in thy own
Heart, I do recommend thee as unto that which will give a true Discerning and
right Understanding of the things of God, as it is hearkened unto, and obeyed.

J. N.

WE generally profess, that we do believe, That the Holy Scriptures were
written for our Learning; that is, Episcopation, Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptist, and Quakers, etc. And that we ought to prove our Doctrine and
Principles by them: And we also do say, That if any Man do hold or endeavor to
prove any Doctrine or Principle that is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, that
we ought not to believe them, although they (...) never so Orthodoxly, called, or
subtle Endeavors to prove their Assertion. Now such a one as the latter is G.
T. For he greatly endeavors to prove, That Jesus Christ was not in the
Beginning; and that the World was not made by him, which is contrary to the
Holy Scripture; and he also endeavors to prove the first Day of the Week to be
the Christian Sabbath; the which he has no Scripture to prove, as he himself
does acknowledge. I shall set down some of his own words in his Book: First,
concerning Christ Jesus; in p. 4. he says, We say that it may be Orthodoxly
denied and asserted, That Jesus Christ did not make the World, for the World
was 4000 Years before ever Jesus Christ was: And in p. 5. he says, In the Old
Testament Christ is Prophesied of to come; how could he then create the World:
And in p. 12. he says, We have sufficiently Answered that it was not the Lord
Christ that created the World: And in p. 19. he speaking of before the Fall of
Man, says, In which time there could not be so much as any need or use of a
Jesus or a Christ; nor was there so much as the least hint of him given, by
either Prophecy or Promise: (And then he says) much less was he himself in
Being: And in p. 130. he says, I think I have shown that the Lord Christ did
not make the World.

Now here, all that can see with a single Eye, may see the darkness and
blindness of this Man; yea, the gross^ darkness that may be felt; yea, the
blindness, the born blindness. Oh! Erroneous Doctrine; who will believe or
receive such Doctrine, as is so contrary to the Holy Scriptures of Truth? Now
that this is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, is easily proved: And by the
Assitance of the Holy Spirit of God, I shall undertake to prove, That Jesus
Christ was in the Beginning, and that the World was made by him: For Christ
Jesus said to the Jews, Before Abraham was, I am, John 8.58. And the Apostle
Paul, speaking of the Jews, said, They drank of that Spiritual Rock that
followed them; and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. And Christ in Prayer
said, And now, O Father, Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory
which I had with thee before the World was: And he farther said, Thou lovedst
me before the foundation of the World, John 17.5, 24. And in Chap. 1. ver. 10.
It is written, He was in the World, and the World was made by him; and the
Apostle Paul positively says, That God created all things by Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 3.9. And he speaking again of Christ Jesus, says, By him were all things
created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible;
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; all things
were created by him and for him, Coll. 1.16. And the Apostle writing to the
Hebrews, further says, God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in
times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he
made the Worlds, Heb. 1.1, 2. Now here it is evident, from the words of Christ
and his Apostles, That Jesus Christ was in the Beginning, with the Father; and
that all things were created by him. More might be said to prove that Jesus
Christ was in the Beginning, and that all things were created by him: But this
being sufficient, I shall proceed to reply to the other part of his Book; but
first I shall set down some of his own words in his Book, that the Reader may
see what it is that I do return an Answer unto: The first words in his Book are
as follows, The Lord's Day Vindicated, or the first Day of the Week the
Christian Sabbath: And in p. 33. he speaking of the seventh Day, and of Christ,
says, He designed (to wit Christ) its speedy Absolution as the seventh Day,
and its Conversion into the first Day. Now this wants a Proof from G. T. And in
p. 44. he speaks of the Change of the seventh Day into the first Day Sabbath,
as he calls it; and in p. 59 and 60. he says, And we say the seventh Day being
cashiered, the first Day ought to be its successor. I wonder from whence he
will prove this: And in p. 85. he mentions Christ's words, where it is said, The
Son of Man is Lord, even of the Sabbath Day: And then he says a Proof which we
make use of to prove our Doctrine of the first Day Sabbath; but I say this is
no Proof at all: And in p. 114. he says, The Seventh Day Sabbath was observed
in Commemoration of the Works of Creation, until a more admirable Work of God
should be Accomplished; so the first day ever after should be the Holy Rest. It
will be very hard for G. T. to prove this; and it does also manifest his great
Ignorance, of the Resting Place that the Servants of the Lord have in Christ
Jesus. Now here the Reader may see, that his endeavors are to prove the first
Day of the Week to be the Christian Sabbath; and yet in p. 56. he says, We
grant that the Holy Scripture do call no other Day of the Week a Sabbath, but
the seventh: And in p. 94. he says, The first Day is never called Sabbath in
Scripture; and I say so too, and therefore he might very well have been silent:
But here, all whose Understanding is open, may see how this Man labors like a
Man beating the Air, or that builds without a Foundation; for himself does
acknowledge, that he has no Scripture for a Foundation: But if we, who in
scorn are called Quakers, should bring such Doctrine as we had no Scripture to
prove, how would People cry out against us? And indeed, Reason enough too: But
we bring no such Doctrine, God forbid we should; for we are a People that have
an honorable Esteem for the Holy Scriptures. Well, but I would not have any to
think that I am going about to plead for the Observance of the seventh Day as a
Sabbath; I say, Nay; although it was a Day that was once commanded to be observed
as a Sabbath or Rest, which is all one: And this was an high Day with the Jews,
for they blamed Christ Jesus, because his Disciples plucked the Ears of Corn,
and because he did Cures on that Day; but the Apostle Paul tells us, That the
Sabbath Days, with other Observations, are shadows of things to come; for he
writing to the Collosians, Chap. 2.16.17. says, Let no Man therefore judge you
in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of an holy Day, or of the new Moon, or of
the Sabbath Days, which are a shadow of things to come, but the Body is of
Christ. Now here we may see that the Sabbath Day was a shadow; of what, may
some say, why the Body is of Christ: He that can understand, let him: Christ is
the Substance; for the Apostle Paul says, The Law was our Schoolmaster, to
bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. And again, Christ is the end of the Law, Romans
10.4. So we may see that Christ is the Substance, shadowed forth in the Time of
the Law; therefore Christ is the Christian Sabbath: For as I said before,
Sabbath signifies Rest; and Christ Jesus is the Rest of his People; and he
invites People to come unto him, that so they may Rest in him; for he says,
Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest:
And again, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find
Rest unto your Souls, Matthew. 11.28, 29. And Christ farther said unto his
Followers, These things have I spoken unto you, that in me you might have
peace, John 16.33. Here we may see that Rest and Peace is in Christ Jesus: And
this is the Rest spoken of in Hebrews 4.9; 10. where the Apostle says, There
remains therefore a Rest to the People of God; for he that is entered into
his Rest, he has also ceased from his own works, as God did from his. Now here
we may see, that they that are entered into the true Rest, have ceased from
their own works: They that can understand, let them understand: They that are
entered into the true Rest, cease from their own working, willing, and running,
and are subject to the will of God their Creator, and so are not their own, but
the Lord's, and are not doing their own works, but the work of God; neither are
they following of their own corrupt wills and desires; but they are lead by the
Spirit of God in their own Hearts; for they that are lead by the Spirit of God,
they are Sons of God; see Romans 8.14. And they that are Sons of God, do know
this truest; but G. T. does manifest his Ignorance of it, in applauding of an
outward Day, and putting of it in its room: And in p. 90. G. T. says, That St.
John calls the first Day of the Week the Lord's Day: And in p. 132. he says,
That the Holy Ghost does call the first Day of the Week the Lord's Day. Here G.
T. has made a bold venture, and he will find a very hard task to prove what he
has said; and he does also manifest his ignorance of the Everlasting Day of
God's Power, that the Saints in Light are enjoyers of: For the path of the Just
is as the shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day, Prove.
4.18. And the Apostle Paul writing to the Believers, says, Ye are all the
Children of the Light, and the Children of the Day; we are not of the Night,
nor of Darkness: Therefore let us not sleep, as do others, but let us watch and
be sober; for they that sleep, sleep in the Night, and they that be drunken,
are drunken in the Night; but let us who are of the Day, be sober, These. 5.5,
6, 7, 8. Now where is an invisible Day spoken of, that the Sanctified Ones are
made living Witnesses of; and the Apostle Peter, he also speaks of this
invisible Day; for he says, We have also a more sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto you do well, that you take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a
dark place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet.
1.19. (Mark;) here the Apostle speaks of the dawning of the Day, and of the
arising of the Day Star in the Heart: Blessed are they that are Witnesses of
it, for it expels the darkness, and causes it to fly away; and it gives a
true discerning, and a right understanding of the things of God: But G. T.
manifests himself to be ignorant of this invisible Day of the Lord; and so
appears not to be an Inhabitant of the Holy City, new Jerusalem; for they that
are Citizens of this Holy City, are living Witnesses of the Everlasting Day of
God's Power, dawned and broken forth. An Everlasting Day indeed, For there
shall be no Night there, Rev. 21.25. and 22.5. He that can hear, let him hear,
and understand. Now as for the Days of the Week, they are called as follows;
the first Day, the second Day, the third Day, the fourth Day, the fifth Day,
the sixth Day, the seventh Day, Genesis 1.5.8.13.19.23.31. and 2.2. The Lord's Day
is an Everlasting Day, and the true Communicants are living Witnesses of it;
for in this Everlasting Day, the true Fellowship stands; see the 1 John 1.7.
Genesis 1.5. The Light is called Day, and in the Light, the true Fellowship
stands: But as for the Days of the Week, they have their Names, although they may
properly be said to be the Lord's Days, because he ordained them; but he has
given them Names, and we ought to call them by the Names that he has given
unto them, and the Names are as is before showed: And as for the seventh Day,
being called a Sabbath, I have spoken to that already: But as for the first Day
of the Week, the Apostles did not call it a Sabbath, nor yet, as I find, the
Lord's Day; but they called it as it was called in the Beginning, The first Day
of the Week; for its written, That Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, came to
the Sepulcher, as it began to dawn, toward the first Day of the Week; see
Matthew. 28.1. and Mark 16.2. and Luke 24.1. and John 20.1. and in Cor. 16.1.2.
the Apostle Paul says, Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have
given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye upon the first Day of the
Week. (Mark;) here the Apostles did not call the first Day of the Week, the
Christian Sabbath; neither did they call it the Lord's Day, but the first Day
of the Week; therefore, it is good for all People, professing Christianity, to
take Example by the holy Men of God, and call the Days by their Names, and not
put new Names, that they have no command, nor yet Example for: Well, but some
may query or say, Ought we not to set apart one Day in seven? Answer, I say it
is nessary, yea, needful, that one day in seven should be set apart, for
several Reasons. First, It is needful that Man and Beast should Rest some time
from their Labor. Secondly, Men and Women, being free from their outward
Labor and Concern, they may be the more freely given up in their Hearts and
Minds to wait upon God and Worship him; a Duty that is incumbent upon us all; a
Duty that we all owe unto Almighty God; therefore blessed are all they that do
perform it aright; the which is rightly performed in Spirit and in Truth; see
John 4.23, 24. Thirdly, That Servants that else might not have liberty, that
they may have liberty to wait upon God, and Worship him. Now it is well known,
through several Nations, that we who in scorn are called Quakers, do cease from
our outward Labor, and Assemble our selves together, to wait upon God, and
Worship him on the first Day of the Week; and yet we cannot therefore call it
the Christian Sabbath, for we have no such Example from the Holy Apostles, but
as they did, so do we, call it the first Day of the Week. Now as for the Names
of the Days, which are commonly used amongst many People, they sprang from the
old Pagan Saxons; see Verstigans Antiquities, and Cambden's Brit. For on the
first Day of the Week, they worshipped the Idol of the Sun, which was placed in
a Temple, from whence they called it Sunday. The second Day of the Week they
Dedicated to the Idol of the Moon, from whence they called it Monday. The next
was the Idol of Planets, which was the Idol of Tuisco, who was the first and
chiefest Man of that Name among the Germans unto whom the Name of Tuesday was
especially Dedicated. The next was the Idol Wooden, whom the Saxons Honored
for their God of Battle, from whence they called the fourth Day Wednesday. The
next was the Idol Thor, from whence the Name Thursday is retained instead of
the fifth Day of the Week. The next Idol was the Goddess Friga, to which Idol
they Dedicated the sixth Day of the Week, and called it Friday, which is
retained unto this Day. The last was the Idol Seater, from whence the seventh
Day is called Saturday.

Now it is good for all People to leave these old Pagan, Saxon, Heather Names,
and call the Days as they are called in Scripture, as is before showed. The
Lord prosper his Great Work, and cause his Truth to spread more and more, is
the Prayer and Desire of my Soul; even so. Amen.

EXON, 9th Month, 1692. Written by a Lover of the Lord Jesus Christ, JOSEPH NOT

THE END.

