A CLEAR OPTIC DISCOVERING To the EYE of REASON; That Regality is not
inconsistent with the Ends of Government. That Episcopacy and Presbytery are of
the Essence of Government. That Independency is incorporated into the Body of
Government. That Levelling is allowable in the constituting of Government. And
that the Recusants are hugely mistaken in the Constitution of their Roman
Hierarchy.


Roughly set out in an humble address TO THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.

By ANTHONY NORWOOD, A cordial Votary for the Peace of the Nation.

London, Printed for Richard Moon, and Edward Thomas, and are to be sold at the
seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard, and in Green Arbor, 1654.

To the Right Honorable the Speaker of the Parliament of England, and to the
Earls, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and Burgesses respectively, now invested by
the Suffrage of the People, with the Supreme Authority of the Nation.
Right Honorable,
THe reasonable Caveat of a poor obscure man may sometimes save a City, and may
possibly therefore be serviceable to a Commonwealth. I owe a duty to my Nation,
and must either endeavor to perform it, or be condemned of want of Religion
and humanity. This has obliged and emboldned me to tender this Mite as an
oblation for the peace and welfare thereof to you the honorable Trustees of
the Nation, by whom the people are in a longing expectation to be restored to
their often promised and dearly purchased Rights and Liberties.

Sir, I have been too long a sad Spectator of those bloody imbroylments, which
have pierced through the Heart of this Nation, whereof I am a sympathizing
Member, and have observed that the diversity of opinions in point of
Government, is that which has been a principal motive to the mournful Tragedy,
and still renders the people unsatisfied and unreconciled. This cause being
taken away, the effects may happily follow; and therefore I humbly crave leave
to present these my solitary conceptions upon that subject.

Not to trouble you over long with their vanity who are enemies to all
Government, I shall only say, that albeit it be true, that during the short
time that Man continued in his innocence, there was none manifestly appearing,
because then there was no need of any, and none might have been had he
continued still in the same spotless condition: yet sin being since crept into
the whole mankind by the fall of Adam, to question now whether God does
tolerate and approve of Government, is to question whether he has left Man
power to prevent those infinites of inconveniences, which every day are
multiplied by the growth and overspreading prevalency of sin, and by
consequence to draw a suspect upon the Creator, as if he were too unmindeful of
the preservation of his own creatures.

This being blown over, I shall now with your patience, endeavor to
demonstrate upon what right the Authority of your Assembly is founded, what
power you have by virtue of that right, and how invalid their pretenses are who
stand in competition with that right. That so the lawfulness and fullness of
your Authority being made clear, you may cheerfully proceed in the managing of
that trust which the people of this Nation have reposed in you, and they
reduced to their wonted compliance with your Authority.

Sir, That which has appeared your most eminent opponent is Monarchy, which
being by the Abetters truly defined, to be a sole Government in one without
Copartners or limitation, is totally destructive to your Authority: Yet this
form of Government (say they) is of divine Ordination. But he that compares the
definition with the doctrine that has been every where published by those of
that opinion, wherein some of them contend, that the Government of a Christian
Commonwealth ought to be partly Regal, and partly Episcopal; othersome partly
Regal and partly Presbyterian, and that both the one and the other (though in
the hands of distinct and contemporary persons) are of divine institution, will
hardly apprehend any safety in adhering to a doctrine wherein he finds so much
contradiction.

Indeed in the judgment of any considering man the doctrine will seem
extremely impertinent, not only because, if it should be admitted that
Monarchical Government is of divine Ordination, yet it will rest disputable who
amongst infinite millions of men ought to be the only Monarch: But also because
according to their own definition and doctrine, he only can be said to be a
Monarch, who, as Nebuchadnezzar had, has from God the sole dominion over the
People of all Nations, and in the Beasts of the field the like sole propriety;
and if it be true of that, or of the Monarchy of Augustus Coesar, which comes
nearest to it, which they pretend of others, that they ought to descend
hereditarily, either the late world knew no lawful Monarchs, if it did, it will
be no less lawful to subdivide every of them into as many more as they contain
families, then to divide those Monarchies into so many as are now said to be in
Christendom.

This then may be concluded from their own premises, that it is as agreeable to
the will of God to reduce Monarchical Government into Families, as to continue
it in Commonwealths. And this seems to be the clear intendment of the
institution, as well by the example of the sons of Noah, who without regard to
the priority of blood in the elder brother did each of them govern his own
family Monarchically; as by that of Abraham, who having the advantage of
extraordinary illumination, years and blood, did not take cognizance in a case
of difference between his own and the servants of his Nephew Lot, but rather
advised a separation to prevent the growing contention.

There needs no more to prove, that every Master of a family did or might
originally govern his own dependents Monarchically and independently of any
other humane authority: the disposing therefore of the world into several
Colonies or Commonwealths composed of diverse families, cannot truly be taken to
be the product of divine Ordination; but of some political humane institution,
which howsoever they may probably at the first be quartered out by the violent
decision of the sword thirsty after rule and domination; yet where God, who
only may dispense with his own laws, made it not lawful by some particular
known Commission, could not be legally established, but by the voluntary
combination of agreeing families, over every of which the Superior being by
nature independent, and having a sole jurisdiction within his own verge,
whosoever did assume a power in prejudice to that right did commit an act
inconsistent with the end of associating, which mainly regards the preservation
of each incorporated Members propriety, and made himself guilty with Nimrod, of
that violence which was never yet approved by Divinity.

Be pleased to take a scantling by a family, wherein, besides only where nature
seals the obligation, what allegiance is created is by consent, as between
Masters and servants, Husbands and Wives, though that sex be condemned to
servitude by God himself, and you will easily admit that the Masters subjection
is not lawfully acquirable upon lower terms: for it is too much below reason
to think that the Superior is naturally in a more servile condition then his
subordinates; or allowing him the same freedom not to allow the same rule to
hold in Commonwealths, which are but larger copies of that smaller Original.
And therefore whosoever has not a disposition to contend (against all right)
that the customary pretenses and practices of man have power to supercede
everlastingly a positive Law of God, will grant, that the Supreme Authority of
this Nation is of right really and independently in the Fatherhood, not to be
alienated but by consent.

Sir, For the further manifestation of this truth, give me leave to offer to
you these following reasons; The first drawn from the necessity of a known
allegiance; that is a necessity of knowing that Magistrates and subordinates
have a lawful personal relation one to another; and a necessity of knowing what
the power of the one, and duty of the other is being so related. And this
as well in respect of the Governor, as of the governed: because as the first
may sin by imposing upon those over whom, and in such cases wherein he has no
warrantable jurisdiction, so may the other by betraying their own persons,
liberty or propriety to an obtruded power, or by declining the duty he ows to
his real Superior to comply with the more irregular power of an Alien.

Now amongst Masters of Families equally free, independent and uncompellable to
associate, who have a sole and equal jurisdiction over their respective
subordinates, it will be but lost labor to find out such an allegiance but by
consent; and this, being passed, without limitation, by associated Masters of
families, to such of the Association, as they esteem most trusty and able to
manage public concernments, convayes to the elected a sole and independent
power over the persons and estates of the Electors, and all those who do
depend upon them, to all intents and purposes relating to common accommodation.

To make out such an Allegiance between a King and a People, or between the
Lords and them, in the way wherein they usually claim: is altogether
impossible; For first, they have no warrant to lay a foundation for Government,
they cannot lawfully compel people to associate. Next because the Royal
pretenses are generally drawn from the quality of the Office, that of the Lords
for the effects of that qualification, and admitting that every Nation ought to
be governed by a King, yet it will rest questionable, whether every King ought
to have that latitude of power which may be pretended; and that being allowed
will not assert the lawfulness of his personal calling to that Office, or
determine what people are unquestionably under his jurisdiction.

The next is from the nature of municipal laws, by which it is unavoidably
necessary, for the peaceable being of every populous Commonwealth, that many
actions be made criminal, and many crimes liable to punishment diversely from
what is prescribed by the finger of God. Such as are many of the several sorts
of Treasons, petty Treason, Felony, and the like, punishable by death, or
confiscation, or both. Some whereof differ little from that of Shimei his going
over the Brook Kedron, for which Solomon his King had no power to take away his
life, had not Shimei himself first consented to forfeit it upon that condition.

In the making of these Laws there is an absolute necessity, that the
Lawmakers have a right of power over the persons and Estates of the whole
People of that Nation wherein they are to be executed: because no man may
dispose of that wherein he has not a lawful interest. That such a right is not
annexed to the Regal Office, is plainly demonstrable by that sour vengeance,
which God took upon Ahab and his house, for tampering to take away the Vineyard
and life of his known subject Naboth; and if Kings have not, neither have the
Lords who derive only from Regal Prerogative; and if neither of these two have
such a right, it remains wholly in the Representatives of the People, and they
are the only Lawmakers; unless there be something more in the Clergy then in
other Christians, which will wind them in upon another score to be sharers in
the same Authority. And that (with your patience) comes in the next place to be
experimented.

What claim they lay is said to be derived from the Apostles, of whom it is
written, that they did not take upon them to dispose of the goods of Ananias
without his consent, nor punish the detention without Miracle; and I think that
unless they can entitle themselves to the like qualifications, they will
hardly Ex Officio prove themselves competent Lawmakers.

Sir, I remember that Linsy-woolsie garments were forbidden to be worn by the
children of Israel, as those which being composed of ingredients of discordant
and fretting quality, would not endure long in one and the same piece. Gods
Word is positive, that no man can serve two masters. And when I observed how
wide the rents are which have been every where made in the Church of Christ by
dividing the polity thereof into Ecclesiastical and Civil, and how little light
there is in the Word of God to direct people into a due and safe course of
obedience to each of these two capacities respectively, I was not apt to think
the continuance to be at all consistent with the ways of God, or peace of the
Nation.

Yet something they have to shore up the Tradition, and that is the Priesthood
of Israel, which they say does typically relate to these Gospel Times. Which no
doubt is true; and let them but suspend their Hierarchy till they can produce
one Law made by that Priesthood whilst it continued in its purity, and I think
that will put an end to the business. But here seems to me to lie the great
mistake: They would have that Nation to be a type of one, or of all Christian
Nations only, whereas it was a Type of the whole world; the Levitical
Priesthood representing who are, the rest of the Tribes who are not of the
household of faith, who though they be not within the pale, yet are not out of
the purlew of the great Forest of Christ; and though not actually in, yet
potentially and in expectancy are of the Church; for the benefits of Christ's
merits are extendable to all, though not taken hold of by all mankind. And
thus between the Type and the Antitype, there hold still due correspondence,
which would not hold so currantly if the Type were applied only to the
Christian part of the World: because Christ has made all those Priests to God
his Father, who have laid hold on him by faith.

Their spiritual Charter of Authority is vacated, if they cannot prove
themselves to be solidly invested by God with the Priesthood. And since the Son
would not suffer his Disciples to forbid that stranger to cast out Devils in
his Name, who followed not him their Master, me think I may easily infer, that
no man who is endowed with so much grace as to believe all the Articles of
faith essentially necessary to Salvation, is prohibited by the Father to impede
the Devils entrance, by interposing those outward ordinary means which he has
prescribed. And this not alone in themselves, but to all others: for love is a
general duty, which has reference to all mankind; and it is little less then
blasphemy to think that God requires that at man's hand, without giving him a
plenary Commission to express it, nor can it be any way so well expressed as by
endeavoring to make people capable of the merits of their Savior. Amongst
Christians then there is none of the Quorum in this Commission, and I see not
how any can be without the approbation and consent of their associated
fellow-Commissioners; and I need not say, that the same reason which holds for
Discipline that does for Doctrine.

I might here for a further confirmation of the premises, mind you of some
pertinent Texts in Scripture both under the Law and in the time of the Gospel;
and show you that before God permitted the Israelites to have Kings, which was
upon an emergent occasion, he gave a general Commission to the People to choose
them Judges and Officers in all their Tribes. That David and Hezekiah, two
Kings of that Nation, who have left behind them as good a Character of
righteous Government as any, called the people to consult with them about two
businesses of greatest importance, the one touching fetching home of the Ark,
the other about keeping the Passover. And that the Apostles, in taht weighty
controversy concerning Circumcision, advised with the Elders and Brethren; and
by their approbation sent letters of reconciliation to the dissenters. Whereby
it is manifest in what regard the consent of the People was had in those first
and best ages, whether it were in spiritual or temporal concernments. But I
must not spin out an Epistle into a Volume.

Sir, by what has been already offered to your consideration, I suppose that
the necessity of a known mutual Allegiance between Magistrates and subordinates
is made manifest to you; and I conceive it no less apparent that such an
Allegiance cannot be created but by consent: but seeing there is no truth that
meets not with some opposition, besides those already mentioned, bear a little
longer I beseech you with my boldness, whilst I endeavor to remove some
other rubs of a later date, which possibly may yet be thought equivalent or
superlative to this consent.

Suppose the provident hand of God in sending down so many pregnant blessings
upon the Army, should be urged as an evidence of Gods pleasure to confer the
right of Authority upon the Instruments. To manifest that this will not beget
that known mutual Allegiance which is necessarily insisted upon, I shall humbly
beseech you to call to mind that the Parliament did first vote the War, and
then form and give Commission to the Army. That the People did elect, and
thereby give power to the Members of that Parliament, and assist the Army in
their persons, by their prayers, contributions, and correspondence. That
together with the Commanders, the Infantry and Cavalry bore no inconsiderable
share in the great adventure for Liberty; and amongst all these I believe you
will find it as hard to determine upon whom Providence has cast the lot of
Government, as to understand by what Organ it was conveyed; and no less
difficult to discover precisely who are subjected to the effects. Many public
spirited men there were, who labored hard to prepare the way before ever the
Parliament could be convened, or the Army march into the field; and not a few
under whose conduct, during the long contest, God sent the People seasonable
and signal deliverances; and though the good Master of the Vineyard gave as
large a salary to the last comers as to the first, yet he gave to all alike.

I offer this only in relation to those who have not been tainted with
Delinquency to the State: for I should not speak my own reason, should I say
that an Army raised by Authority of Parliament to protect the Nation has not
power, so long as the Government continues unsettled, to use all requisite means
to discover and prevent clandestine machinations, to suppress outrages and
conspiracies eminently destructive to the Peoples peace, to punish those who
are convicted offenders, and to hold those under subjection who have forseited
their freedom, by being parties in an offensive War against the Supreme
Authority of the Nation: for they have appealed to their own swords, and being
cast at a Bar of their own choosing, they cannot truly be said to suffer without
their own consents.

Should it again be supposed, that, as it has been of old insisted upon by the
pretended Clergy, some peculiar and singular dispensation of grace to some
Christians above other some, does carry with it a right to Sovereignty: I am
confident you would not think that this rule will reach all those who are
endowed with the same spirit; and I think not infallibly those who are not
therewith endowed: because all other graces waiting upon, and receiving their
virtue and efficacy through faith, and that being a hidden Mystery wrapped up in
the soul of man, and visible only to the Eye of God, amongst those who profess
to this faith, it is not discoverable by any third person, who is and who is
not capable of the same privileges with real Believers.

I consesse that it is undenyably true, that whosoever has a true and lively
faith, will show it by his works: but good works (that is, morally good) may be
done by those who have no faith. Besides, if works be the only outward
cognizance of grace, and that of Sovereignty, it may be concluded from the rule
of contraries, that sin denotes a want of grace, and a secluding from
Sovereignty. And this will be so far from begetting a known mutual Allegiance
between the Governors and governed, that it will either destroy all
Government, or tolerate those to be Governors who are void of Grace: because
upon this account, either there will be no more Magistrates found to punish
Malefactors, then there were accusers remaining to cast the first stone at the
Adulteress, or such only as by professing themselves to be without sin do
disclaim any interest in a Savior.

Sir, It is not many months since there came a little pamphlet to my hands,
which had something in it not impertinent to the present purpose, the Author
said to be a person, who formerly had written a larger Tract in vindication of
the power and proceedings of the Peoples late elected Representatives: but in
this last urges that of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, advising them to be
obedient to Nero, who (without all contradiction) far surpassed the late King
in all kind of wickedness, as an obligation upon all Christians to submit to
that power whatsoever it be under which their lot is fallen. I shall leave it
to your better judgment to calculate what a huge weight of blood this doctrine
(if it be true) will lay upon the then Parliament, their Army, and all those
who did adhere or contribute to them, and waving the dispute as that which has
been the subject of many satisfactory impressions, apply my self only to show
how far the Authors opinion goes along with the Premises. From whence first it
may be concluded, that if those primitive Christians, who doubtless had then
as much of the Spirit, and thereby as great privileges as any since their
times, were enjoined by the Apostle to submit to an Infidel power, certainly
the gifts of the Spirit do not render the Receivers unquestionably capable of
command.

Secondly, He acknowledges that if Nero had attained the Throne by the
suffrage of the people, it had been more orderly then by the Senate, which it
seems by him was not so elected; and if by the Senate less disorderly, then by
the artifice of his mother, and help of the Cohorts and rest of the Soldiery.
All this comes very near to what I have delivered. And had he not been short of
telling his Readers of the sin that Nero committed by falling upon the most
disorderly way of the three, he had fully justified my saying; for I endeavor
to maintain, that the right to choose their own Magistrates is in the people,
and if it be granted that he that takes upon him to superintend them without
their consent, is guilty of sin, their right is fully asserted.

If not in Nero an Infidel, yet to usurp a power upon a self-account is
certainly a sin in a Christian, and that not of the smaller size: yet I will
not determine that that Scripture in the Thessalonians, wherein the Man of sin
is said to sit in the Temple of God as God, may in a degree be applied to any
persons, who being Members of Christ's Church, do under the pretense of some
peculiar divine dispensation, exercise a coercive jurisdiction over their
brethren of the same faith, though that in Peter, wherein Christians are
forbidden to Lord it over Gods inheritance, seems very much to countenance the
application: But I may say, and yet preach no false doctrine, that it is not
the vocal appellation, but the actual prelation or Prelating that contracts
the guilt.

Be this the sense of the Holy Ghost or be it not, it had not been unworthy the
late self-voters serious thoughts to consider, whether he that makes a Law to
compel others to pay Subsidies and Contributions, or to hazard their lives in
the face of an enemy, or by which any other is deprived of his Liberty, Goods,
Lands, or Life for counterfeiting the public coin or Seals, do not thereby
commit a sin little inferior to that of Ahab, and make himself obnoxious to
the like punishment, unless he have some such warrant as Solomon had to take
away the life of his subject Shimei.

Liberty has been proclaimed, which, amongst associated people, who must live
under a Law, consists only in the freedom of electing Lawmakers. Indeed
consent is that alone that takes the stain of oppression and antichristian
usurpation out of the authority of Christian Magistrates. It is the spring that
gives motion to all the wheels in the Watch of National Government. And whether
the case of Government be handled under a Civil or under an Ecclesiastical
notion, your Authority springing from the consent of the people, still remains
the same sole and entire, without any dependency or commixture, what pretenses
soever have been interposed. The peoples independent power is consigned over to
you, by which you are invested as well with the Supreme as with the Legislative
power, for they are twins not to be separated, but by a mutual and total
Annihilation. This is the authority and privilege of Parliament; and you are
the Guardians of this Privilege and Authority. If it miscarry through your
default, you fail in your Trust, and the sin will lie at your own door.

You need not object the want of Presidents, you have the example of the
peoples last Representatives, who undauntedly acted by these justifiable
Principles, and were cheerfully seconded by the people with liberal
Contributions. You have the concurrence of the Scottish nation before it was
seduced; and the agreement and cooperation of the Commanders in chief, and of
the rest of the Commanders, Officers and Soldiers of both Armies. You have the
same Army still under the same Commanders, who would not certainly have engaged
so deep in the quarrel, had they not been fully satisfied of the justness of
the Cause. And therefore seeing your authority is the same, and that you are
not convened without their approbation, to fear to proceed upon the same just
and honorable principles, were to seem to suspect them of the ignominious
crime of Apostasy, and that would be taken as ill, as to tell a Soldier that
he is run from his colors.

You have had a fair Copy set you, and the people will have little cause to
give you thanks, if you suffer it to be fullied in your transcribing. By their
insisting upon their own power the Laws of the land are rendered more
authoritative: for the legislative power being solely in the Representatives of
the People, there wanted not cause to apprehend that all the former Statutes
and Charters of this Commonwealth, not excepting Magna Charta, or any other
Statute or Charter whatsoever, being hammered out under a kind of controlment
of Kings and Lords Spiritual and Temporal, who seldom were remiss to improve
their own pretentions, were (if not illegitimate and invalid, yet) not vertual
enough to prevent unquiet expostulations; and whatsoever virulent and
exasperated tongues may suggest, posterity will entertain it as an act of
prudence, justice and honor in your Predecessors, who were entrusted with the
interest of the people, to free the legislative power out of the former
Wardship, and to reassume it to themselves, by whose sole authority the Laws
and Statutes of the Nation might be tendered less subject to querulous censure,
and more obliging.

As it is in making, so it is in executing of Laws, the power by which they
are executed will be doubtful and controvertable, if it be not derived from
the clear stream of the peoples consent. This was plainly experimented the late
Kings case, whose claim being of another nature, and his title and power
therefore uncertain, filled the Nation full of consuming dissensions. Whereas
had he insisted only upon the consent of the people, he might have preserved
the peace of the Nation, rescued his person and family from those sharp
encounters under which they have since suffered, and secured his office from
that hideous storm with which it was at last overwhelmed: for had he owned his
investiture from the People, by which all those litigations that caused the
distempers had been removed, the Regal office (besides that it had the trust
of seeing the Laws duly executed) being military, and so taken to be in the
sense of Scripture, there was no cause why it should be thought an office
prohibited by God, or why the complement of a title should make wise men
stumble at so necessary a supplement to their own defense and safety.

But no title would serve turn, but divine right, and that mounting him upon
too elevating wings, precipitated him to destruction; and prevailed with his
adherents, apprehending thereby something in his person or office, above the
ordinary pitch of humanity, to hazard their persons and estates in a war
against that authority, against which had they prevailed, they had fought
themselves into such a servitude, as their own vassals will not brook to hear
of without regret and indignation.

The very same Simple was found out, as well by the Episcopal as by the
Presbyterian party, and each of them applied it as a cordial to their
Ecclesiastical polity. You will best judge of the virtue, if you please to
observe the operation. That you may see how low they have brought it, give me
leave to uncase this their Patient.

Grant they must, that the primitive Christians had within themselves a
peculiar kind of Government, or else their insisting upon the like in the
present Church is merely idle, and they cannot make any pretense to any
Government peculiar to Christians of the first ages, but what was in their
hands who were distinguished by the denominations of Bishops, Presbyters, or
Elders and Deacons. So that although all of these did or might preach, yet
their office was not Doctrinal but Disciplinary. And this I shall endeavor to
make further appear by these reasons. First, because they were approved fit for
those Offices by their known care and skill to govern well their own families.
Next, because the direction of the Apostle to choose some to officiate in
concernments relating to discipline, to the end, that they who were set apart
for Doctrine, might not be withdrawn from that more necessary duty, would have
exempted them also from any office of that nature, had those Bishops and the
rest been of the Doctrinall order.

They were then no more but civil Magistrates in a Christian colony; and I
think that the Government of this Nation by a Representative Council of the
Fatherhood, wherein the Speaker may be properly termed the Bishop,
Superintendent or Prelate, and the rest of the Members the Eldership or
Presbytery, is not at all different from that of the primitive Churches, save
only in the variation of title, which, though it has made a huge noise in the
Christian world, are no more but the same sense in a different dialect.

It is as possible to stop water from returning to its proper Center, as to dam
up authority from the Sea of the people. But the opinion of holiness dazles
the eyes of wise men. It will cast a sad reflection upon the soul of every
tender hearted Christian, who is no enemy to the unity and prosperity of this
Nation, when he considers how many of her natives, men of able and active
parts, who might therefore be of singular use to this Commonwealth, have made
themselves incapable of being employed in the managery of public affairs, and
of joining together in Communion with their brethren of the same faith and
Nation, by drawing counter to a mild and warrantable Authority, in the more
rigid and chargeable yoke of the Roman Hierarchy, that has not whereupon to
lay a foundation, but what has been here expressed.

The attribute of holiness is common to all Believers; and, although in the
primitive times, when Christians were under a twofold kind of Government, the
one peculiar to themselves, the other Emperial and in common with them to all
other people under that jurisdiction, they might make use of the term, to
distinguish between their own and the Emperial polity, yet being in that point
now all equal, their polity cannot be otherwise formed but by moral and
prudential Principles, which had it been so understood, would have long ago
reconciled the native Recusants to the English Discipline; and the
nonconforming Protestants to those indifferent things of decency and order,
which have been heretofore bogled at as superstitious and idolatrous, in regard
they were stained with the suspicious spots of imputative sanctity.

This, together with the activity of the Ministry in intruding themselves into
disciplinary negotiations, is that which has wrought the Office into distaste
with the people; but were this Remora removed, and they content to conform
themselves to the Apostles Rule, not to leave the Word of God to serve tables,
I cannot think that in this Commonwealth, any ingenuous man would imagine it
less convenient to have a settled Ministry for all public oratories, then to
have Judges selected from amongst others of the same profession to sit in
places of judicature, as that which is providentially necessary to avoid
confusion where there is a parity. And thus the quarrellings about the
ordination and maintenance of Ministers, together with those formal
accommodations, which do pertain to their officiating, may receive a
satisfactory composure, being taken only as civil institutions, and regulated
by the Representatives of the nation, who by the unlimited consent of the
people interested in all capacities, are qualified to prescribe, as well
unpresidented forms of administration in public devotions, as unexampled
punishments for new coined crimes; and with the same obligation upon the
consciences of the consenters.

Some object that the Galatians had Congregations independent one of another,
which were accounted and called Churches, and therefore they think that
national Churches are not allowable. What then? A Parliamentary power they
acknowledge. Must then every Congregation or Classis smell of the old leaven,
and have within it self an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction? Admit they must. From
whence comes this Jurisdiction, but from the consent of the parties
congregated? and by the like consent it is conveyed again to the
Representatives of the Nation, by which they are invested with their sole
power, unless they can produce some clause of reservation.

But truly I conceive their allegation will not hold: for it is plain that in
the first ages, there were Churches in private houses, which by their own
confession did not go against Gods order in forming themselves into
Congregations; and to enlarge Congregations into National Churches, seems not
to be less agreeable to his pleasure: because it comes nearer to that great
design of God, to bring all true Believers into one fold under one Shepherd
Christ Jesus. And therefore this of the Galatians I conceive to be caused by
the interposition of their circumferencing neighbors, who being Infidels
hindered that free intercourse and Communion, which had been more agreeable to
their profession.

What should I say more? You are the independent Presbytery or Eldership of
this Classis or Congregation of the Christian World, who have the sole power of
making and repealing Laws, and of placing and displacing subordinate Officers,
whether Magisterial or Ministerial, as shall in your judgments seem most
conducing to public accommodation. And this form of Government wherein the
native equality and liberty of every individual Member of this Commonwealth is
indifferently and unanimously submitted to persons elected by themselves, for
the advancement of every man's private together with the public interest, may
(besides those that I have already run over) fully satisfy the Levelling
party, who have as well an equal freedom to elect, as an equal possibility
to be the elected; except their design runs so high, as an aim to cast all
sublunary blessings into one joint stock, for an equal benefit to all mankind;
and if this be their plot (though it were the way to restore me to the capacity
of eating daily bread, yet) I must not bear a part in it: because the command
of God to relieve the poor is a void command, if in the Goods of this world
they have a right to an equal proportion; nor may it be admitted that God
forbids not Man to cover his neighbors, but his own propriety.

Thus have I wound my self out of the maze of National Government assisted by
the clew of Consent. And now (me thinks) I might more properly call it a
National Directory, instructing associated families to continue in an honest
and peaceable correspondence one toward another for public preservation; and
this drawn out by their own Representatives, prescribing civil rules, and
ordaining Officers as well to see those rules observed, as to punish offenders
according to the rules by them prescribed, wherein there is no injury or
compulsion, because acted by consent, which being voluntary lays upon every
man an equal obligation; and these rules being repealable by the Trustees of
the Nation, and by what titles soever those Magistrates who are by them
constituted, are distinguished, the power of the people is not taken away, but
they continue still the Vicegerents under Christ their King.

Sir, What desolations have befallen this Commonwealth by the fatal divisions
which happened amongst the Members of the late elected Parliament, cannot be
remembered without a sad resentment; and it is not impossible that some of those
different opinions, which have hitherto nourished private animosities amongst
the people, may yet have too great a reflection upon your Assembly. Your unity
may bind up these wounds; and truly in this which I have offered to that end,
I see nothing deviating from the Will of God, or inconsistent with the just
ends of Government; and therefore not the Jesse likely to be instrumental to
concord.

It is the restraining of sin, and a tendency to his glory, that renders
National Government accepted with God. There is a failer in both these, if
Government be not built up upon a just and right foundation; and sin seldom
draws along with it Gods protection. Justice exalts a Nation, but sin is a
shame to any People, is the aphorism of the wisest Solomon. Besides that it
cannot be without sin, this Nation has experimentally felt that two
counterpoysing powers in one politic, is as monstrous as a heart and a heart
in one natural body.

Sir, My zeal for God and my Nation has made me too much a trespasser upon
your patience. But prosperity flows there, where righteousness and peace do
kiss each other. This is the object of my prayers, this the object of my
wishes, this the object of my endeavors, and this is that which has drawn upon
you the trouble of this rude presentment. I have heard the sad complaints of
the People who justly cry out for redress, and I despair not of seeing some
healing applications. I know that the many tempestuous counter blasts, which
have broken in upon this Nation, have driven in before them exasperating
irregularities. But let him that expects a strict observance of rule amidst
such high distractions, betake himself to frame some curious masterpiece, in
the main top of a ship tossed with ahideous storm, constant in no point of the
Compass, and there try what credit he can get by the undertaking. The rigor of
the Law is often injurious, where it meets not with some qualification. In
those actions which are not steered in a direct course, necessity excuses the
Pilot, if they be directed to a right Haven.

Sir, I have heard that one of the bravest Generals that ever commanded the
Roman Legions, after he had victoriously asserted the peoples liberty, and put
an end to a Civil war, offered up his power and Commission to the then
assembled Senate, by whom he was re-invested and gratified with more triumphant
dignities. Here was a fair and honorable correspondence. And this procured a
present and lasting peace to that Empire, and rendered it flourishing and
formidable.

Sir, I have now discharged my Conscience without design, without partiality,
without prejudice. Your business is great, Your trust great, I have now no
more to do but to prostrate my self at the feet of him who is the Fountain of
all goodness, humbly praying that he will direct you in all your consultations
to reflect still upon his glory, the salvation of your own souls, and the unity
and welfare of this disjoynted Nation. This will draw down the blessings of
Heaven upon your endeavors. And for this shall be the daily oblations of

Your Honors poor Orator And humble Servant Anthony Norwood.


