A LETTER CONCERNING The Storming and Delivering up of the CASTLE of the
DEVISES unto Lieutenant General Cromwell, For the the Service of the KING and
PARLIAMENT.

SENT To Mr. Samuel Bedford, Scout-Master General to the Committee of both
KINGDOMS.

REad in the House of Commons, and Commanded to be Printed, by William Lenthall
Esquire Speaker to the said House.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 25. 1645.

To Mr. Samuel Bedford, Scout-Master General to the Committee of both Kingdoms.
Honored Sir,
THe News at the Devises is this, Sunday at one of the Clock in the Afternoon,
Lieutenant General Cromwell Summoned the Castle; The Governor sent forth
word, that the King his Master put him in trust, and he desired ten days time
to send to him, and in the mean time he would keep it for the King. The
Lieutenant General wished him not to let slip such an opportunity; and if he
would not yield it, he would give him leave to send forth his Lady, and such
other Gentlewomen as were in the Castle, and they should be used with all
civility that might be; And further certified him, that none were more fitting
to keep strong Holds, Forts, and Castles, then the Parliament, for the use of
the King: whereupon, the Governor sent word, that if he would have it, he
should win it, and wear it. Upon receipt of this Answer, the Lieutenant
General gave Command to the Canoneers, presently to give fire, and also to the
Mortar pieces, which played very hot all night; and in the night we raised
Batteries in the Market place, within Pistol shot of the Castle: On Monday
about Eight of the Clock in the morning, the Governor sent forth for a Parley,
and sent out two of his Captains, Captain Challenor, and Captain Garroway; the
Lieutenant General sent two Captains into them, and about eleven of the Clock,
the Lieutenant General sent them in these Propositions following: Viz.

I. That all Commanders and Gentlemen should march to any Garrison the King
had, within Thirty miles, with their Horse and Arms; And that all private
Soldiers should march away, leaving their Arms behind them; but not to go to
the same Garrisons the Commanders marched to.

II. That all Gentlemen in the Castle, should have liberty to go to their own
homes, or beyond the Seas.

III. That all Soldiers that have been formerly in the Parliaments Service,
should be delivered up to the Lieutenant General; and all Soldiers that would
take up Arms in the Parliaments Service, should be entertained.

To these Propositions, the Lieutenant General desired his speedy Answer, that
so they might march away by four of the Clock in the Afternoon. The Governor
condescended to the Lieutenant Generals desire, and accordingly delivered up
the Castle; and to morrow at Ten of the Clock, they are to march out of the
Castle; the Governor and his Officers with their Arms, and his Foot without
Arms; and he is to have three VVayns to carry away his goods, and to have a
safe Convoy to Worcester: So I rest,

Your Servant, Ralph Norton.
Devises, 22. Sept. 1645. 7. at night
FINIS.

