A SERMON Preached to the Honorable Citizens of London, September 29. 1659.
being the day of the Election of their Lord Major.

Wherein is distinctly showed, I. The Usefulness of a powerful Ministry to the
Civil Governor. II. Integrity when in Conflict is most Amiable and in its
highest Glory. III What Virtues are desirable in a Good Magistrate.


By PHILIP NIGH A Servant of Jesus Christ in his Gospel.

London Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole Printers and Booksellers, at the
Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange 1661.

Ireton Major
A special Court holden the 25. day of October, 1659, in the Afternoon.

IT is ordered that Mr. Nigh be from this Court desired to Print his Sermon at
the Election of the Lord Major of this City.

Sadler.

To the Right Honorable Sr. THOMAS ALEIN Lord Major of the City of LONDON.
My Lord
These few pages thus presented to your hand at your Command, contain the
message of the great God, spoken from him to this Honorable City, and more
especially to your Lordship, being then elected the Nehemiah or Governor
thereof, The publishing of this Sermon though thus late, yet I cannot but deem
it seasonable, not only for that the word of God has a season even out of
season 2 Timothy 4.2. but this being the time that you give up your trust, it does
seasonably serve to provoke you as from the Lord, to a serious and strict
account within your self how you have discharged it, In the Parable of the
steward our Lord Christ calls upon all any way entrusted to give an account
of their stewardship, Then when they may be no longer stewards, Luke 15.2. My
confidence thus far is, that the substance of this Sermon is such, as by
comparing your own heart and ways with the contents thereof. It will prove
helpful to you in the casting up your present great account of this years
Government betwixt God and your own soul, which is required by him of you now
to be done, you will here see upon what terms you took this Office of the Lord,
and what he instructed and directed as your Lordships duty How much you have
prized the assistance of a Godly ministry in carrying on your Government this
year, what Eminency of sincerity has appeared in any difficulty or Conflicts,
with what a public spirit, with what Wisdom, Piety, and Courage, the
Government of this City has been carried on in your Lordships hand, the time
is now come, and God calls upon your Conscience most seriously to consider,
there will be a final and great account which you as we all must give of our
several stewardships, but that will not excuse the omission of this.

I am bold to conclude with the Apostles words, I now write the things unto you
that you formerly heard And did then acknowledge, 2 Cor. 1.13.
And I trust you will acknowledge now at the end and to the end as he there
speaks, And acknowledging make that use thereof I have been now insisting on.
My earnest Prayer unto God is that as this Sermon was by divine appointment the
Early Rain at the first Spring of your Government, so that now it may obtain
the Blessing of the latter Rain at the Inning of the Harvest.

September, 1660. Your Lordships most humble Servant PHILIP NIGH,

A SERMON Preached to the Right Honorable the Citizens of the City of London
upon the twenty ninth of September, 1659. being the day of the Election of
their Lord Major.
The TEXT.
Nehemiah, 6.11. And I said should such a man as I flee, and who is there that
being as I am would go into the Temple to save his Life? I will not go in.


JErusalem that famous City, had Nehemiah their chief Governor, set over them
by that Higher power, under which for their sins they then were in bondage.
Artaxerxes appointed this Nehemiah to that trust, and its more then probable
Considering their then distracted Condition, they would not have chosen so well
for themselves, If your just rights should be taken out of your hands, yet they
will be found in Gods hand for you, who many times by a less pleasing way does
better for us then we would do for our selves

Nehemiah was a person eminently qualified for a Governor, I have chosen him to
be the Pattern by which you may direct your choice this day.

As the trust of Nehemiah was great, and the people of God greatly concerned in
his well or ill management of it, so was his opposition.

The Stratagems and Devices of Tobias and Sanballat with the great Wisdom and
courage of Nehemiah in wrestling through and escaping them is the sum of this
whole Chapter. Their first assault begins with ver. 1. which was subtle and
importunate enough but defeated; and is storied in the nine first verses yet
ver. 10. they are on again, and with greater craft in their design, but to as
little purpose though the Temple was the snare, and a Prophet the Driver, yet
all miscarries, this Holy man will not go into the Temple. How indefatigable
are the Churches Enemies!

Good Nehemiah when got over one brunt He prays for strength against another
ver. 9. Now therefore O God strengthen my hands. Such a prayer at such a time, a
prayer for strength after he had found strength and got the victory, evidently
implies either,

First, That a Good man, though he prevail in a conflict, yet may be left under
such feebleness in his mind, and discouragement in his work as will need a
recruit from above; In our Militia if prayer be neglected, we shall not be able
to stand two brunts together, as at meals so in our Conflicts pray before and
after. Or,

Secondly, If our work be great and we steady in it, opposition likewise will be
great and constant against it. The Enemy though every foot defeated yet will
rally again, How will Balaam go from place to place, and try conclusions that he
may find out a way to curse Israel Pharaoh, how often disappointed in his designs
upon the people of God, yet in what a wretched Constancy is his resolution to
mischief them first or last. This must every good Soldier of Christ mind, No
sooner give fire and discharge, but load again, and stand in an expecting
posture, in a readiness to receive a second assault.

This latter trial of Nehemiah, by the return of Tobiah and Sanballat upon him
in another shape, and the blessed Issue of it is that part of the story only
which is to be the subject of our present discourse; in handling whereof two
particulars are to be insisted upon.

1. The snare or design it self and great artifice used in the projection of
it. 2. The blessed frame of heart in this prudent and holy man by which he
works through it.
For the design. An Apostat Clergyman ( Nehemiah's affection to that tribe
being generally known) is hired by Sanballat and Tobias verse 12. To ffaine
Nehemiah into an eminent and sudden danger and such as there is but one way in
the world to escape it, This way mean and ignoble and not at all suitable to a
man of Honor. But that be may the more easily swallow all, Shemaiah must act
the Prophet and tell his story both in respect of the danger and means of
deliverance as from the Lord. Sudden danger may gaster a man of courage and so
far discompose his mind, as any means of security if at hand will have easy
entertainment, especially if it be the relation or instruction of a Prophet.
Which requires the exercise of our Faith, we ought to believe rather then Judge
of what God directs us to by his Prophets. So that these Impostors thought
themselves sure now they had got a Prophet to act a part in the cheat, Nehemiah
(they knew) would be taken with a Prophet, if there were any way in the world
to seduce him.

From this particular one Observation.

Doct. Governors if Holy, though wise, yet are apt to be led by the Counsel of
their Prophets.

Magistrates and Ministers Princes and Prophets, have near alliance, servants
together under the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. The Magistrate is
(...) The Minister of God, Romans 13.4. the other is (...) a Ruler over us in the
Lord 1 These. 5.12. their employment is about the same persons, to suppress the
evil and encourage the good; Their Rule also that guides them the same;
Magistrates are Commanded to read and meditate on the Law of God and learn
thence his fear, Josh. 1.8. For a man that is in honor and understands not,
is like the beast that perishes, Psalm. 49.20. And Ministers to instruct them
to interpret and apply this Law to the Magistrate and his People upon all
occasions, In any great undertakings the Lord stirs up their spirits together,
the spirit of Zerubbabel Governor and the spirit of Joshua the High Priest,
Hag. 1.14. These two Olive Trees fill the same bowl, Zach. 4. They are joined
together in the success of their work, be it prosperous, Psalm. 118.19, 20. They
bless the Lord together, if otherwise, they suffer together, Rev. 11.4.

This Contexture of interests begets such mutual dependency of each on the
other, that Nehemiah's Enemies, venture all upon the Confidence they had, this
holy man, even in what concerned public safety would listen much to a Prophet.

Application 1. Let Magistrates from this example of Nehemiah be watchful and
circumspect in this respect, and not receive all Counsels hand over head from
such as give it under the Covert of this high Calling. Satan himself who has
the Conduct of the Churches Enemies is in the greatest readiness, thus to
seduce Governors and Magistrates by closing with their Prophets, and speak
destructive Counsels through such Oracles. The Lord purposing Ahabs Ruin, In
what a readiness is Satan to pitch upon this as the surest way to effect it, 1
Kings 22.21. I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in all his Prophets. If
Ahab should have been shie and not value the Counsel of one or two, and
thereupon called a Synod, as in more weighty matters Princes are wont to do,
Satan had fitted him, and all Ahabs advantage by his Synod would have been a
greater Confidence only in the way of his own destruction, for there was a
lying Spirit in All his Prophets.

Application 2. Though it has been thus; yet a good Magistrate will value a
good Minister, and take Counsel from him as an Oracle of God, 1 Pet. 4. Satan
has prevailed with the Prophets, and by them, with Princes to their undoing,
yea and without them also, and against what they have Counseled, and
Magistrates have been unrighteous, Oppressors, and Tyrants over both Ministers
and people, yet Magistracy is the Ordinance of God, and so is the Ministry. It
has bin the practice of wise and holy Governors in all ages to give this
respect to their faithful Ministers. What intimateness was there between Moses
and Aron in Communicating their Counsels and endeavors, the like between Joshua
and Eleazer, David takes advice from his Prophet Nathan, and Josiah from
Huldas, I say wise and holy Governors. That Magistrates encourage their
Prophets, it is not only from their holiness but their wisdom, it is of such a
great and singular advantage, to the more easy governing a City or Nation, the
keeping up of a stirring and powerful Ministry, that wisdom will direct, if no
higher Principle, to put forth their authority this way. I shall the rather add
a word further for the evincing hereof: because our new Modellers look upon the
Ministry as needless, if not hurtful in a Commonwealth.

That so great a multitude as in a City or Nation, and in so great a variety
for disposition, should be kept together ruled and governed by one or a Jew
persons, This doubtless shows such powers are of God, Psalm. 144.2. Who (says
David) subdueth my people under me. This the Lord does, 1. By framing our
Natures to society and fitting us hereunto by principles of morality. And the
good of dependency upon others, for guidance and Conduct is taught us in our
Childhood, and the sense and truth of it nourished with our Mothers Milk. 2.
But that which strikes the main stroke, and brings a People more necessarily
into subjection is that which Paul mentions. Rom 13.5. You must needs be
subject not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience, in which Scripture you
have the two Sinews of Government, the two great Tendons by which the members
of a politic body are brought to move under their head. Wrath and Conscience,
Fear of Punishment, Conscience of Duty, The one from the Civil Magistrate, The
Dignity Splendour and Glory that is put upon him, is to beget fear and dread in
the hearts of his Subjects, and to acknowledge him the Minister of God, a
Revenger to execute Wrath, Rom 13.3. But to bring a people into a Conscientious
subjection, God makes use of another hand, This Principle is to be planted and
daily watered by the Ministers of the word: Jehosophat took this course to
bring his people into a more kindly subjection, He sent his Princes or Civil
Powers, and with them the Levites and Priests, and they had the Book of the Law
of the Lord with them, and went through all the Cities of Judah and taught the
people, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8. And this latter of the two is not only the more
honorable, but the more sure and Constant; for though Wrath puts a must or
necessity as well as Conscience in respect to our obedience, yet with this
difference, obedience from Conscience is willing and out of love, for
Conscience has its seat above all the faculties of the Soul, and brings them
into obedience naturally, But Wrath takes hold of the lower and more servile
part of the Soul, our Fear and Passion, and subdues us by violence, like
putting a Shackle upon the Foot, by which a man may guide his beastindeed, but
it will be with much more strife and difficulty, A Bitt in the mouth, or a Hook
in the Nostrill, the Superior and leading part of the Creature governs and
guides it more naturally, and every limb or member follows each other in a
more kindly motion. 1 Cor. 9.16. A necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto
me if I preach not the Gospel, ver. 17. If I do this willingly -- if against my
will; where moved from the Woe or Wrath only, there may be Obedience, though
against our will, but if there be also Conscientious necessity, a willingness
will naturally follow.

It is also a more sure and Constant obedience, Conscience has the
unchangeable word of God for its foundation, a people so subdued will stick
close in their Obedience. Those that fear God will honor the King, where there
is a Conscience, and thence a giving to God what is Gods, there will be a
giving to Caesar what is Caesar's. As the Lord has granted the use of an Oath
(though a Worship peculiar to himself So also has he the use of Conscience to
the Civil Magistrate to oblige his Subjects in obedience to him. These are
additionals out of the Treasury of his Holiness, and of great importance in the
managing of Civil affairs both which have their edg and Efficacy by the
Constant whettings of a powerful Ministry.

There is therefore this reason of State, why Governors should much esteem the
Ministry, for, without it, they know not how to rule in the Lord nor the people
to obey in the Lord, that is, from a principle of Conscience, there will be no
free subjection where there is no Conscience and respect to God in our
obedience to men: if we have nothing but Wrath and Violence to subdue a people,
we govern men as men govern Beasts, as God governs the Devils and damned in
Hell, they believe and tremble, and in a City or Nation so governed there is
nothing but weeping and gnashing of Teeth, misery with Contempt and indignation
against the powers that are over us, and have brought it upon us.

We come now to the second Branch and what arises more imediately out of the
Text.
And I said shall such a man as I flee etc. wherein,

1. The Evil he was tempted unto: To flee, that is to go into the Temple and so
make an escape, The Temple as a place of security, either Natural for its
strength, or Moral for its privilege. The City lay open having yet no Gates or
doors to secure the Inhabitants, ver 1. but the Temple had, and therefore more
safe, of this he is minded by shemaiah verse 10. Let us shut the doors of the
Temple. Or as a priviledg'd place: Malefactors that are under guilt and fear,
Flee to the Temple and take hold of the Altar, as a refuge and security against
Death and punishment, so Joab fled unto the Tabernacle of the Lord, and caught
hold of the Horns of the Altar, 1 Kings 2.28. Which to do, though it be no sin
or evil in it self, yet in the Circumstances, it was so dishonorable, and
unsuitable to his spirit and place, as he would die rather then do it.

There were these Circumstances would have rendered it evil to him more then to
another. First, He was accused of Treason, that he would be King and cause the
people to rebel against Artaxerxes, now if he had fled, and taken the course
usual with Malefactors for refuge, it would have implied a Guilt and
strengthened the suspicion. Secondly, If he had betaken himself to the Temple
for security only and defense, yet such a fear in a Governor would have been a
great discouragement to all under him, this thing those that laid the design,
had as a Main in their eye and intention, knowing if they could make him
afraid, the advantage they had thereby to hinder the work. Compare his prayer,
and the ground of it as both are laid down in ver. 9. They all made us afraid
(endeavored so to do) saying their hands shall be weakened from the work that it
be not done, Now therefore O God strengthen my hands. That this was the drift
and scope of their wicked design upon him, and the danger he escaped, clearly
appears in verse, 13. therefore was He hired, the Prophet that came as from God,
that I should be afraid and do so and sin, and that they might have matter for
an evil report that they might reproach me.

The snare was so cunningly laid, that as there was the concernment of his life
and the Ruins of the public affairs depending upon it on the one hand to
drive him into it, so was there not any thing simply evil or peccatum inse to
discourage on the other hand. Some Punctilio's only of honor and Credit, which
to neglect is a sin, in some cases only. In case of life and death, the nature
of such omissions is much altered, So that had there not been a very exquisite
mould of Spirit in Nehemiah, and choice Graces, and in a readiness for
exercise, he had been undone, and the people of God with him: And had not he
been thus exercised, the luster of those Graces had not so eminently appeared
unto us.

There is no posture of a man, whose heart God has wrought to himself in truth
and sincerity, wherein Grace and virtue appears in greater luster and Glory
then when he is found in some conflict or under some difficulties: What then he
is, he will appear to be, and what he then appears to be, he is indeed. It is so
with a Magistrate, with a Nehemiah. Afflictions and oppressions are trialls,
And as Gold shines and brightens most when in the fire, so does our Faith, and
Love, and Hope, and every Grace. A Horse is at no time so gallant a Creature as
when mounted in Battle, at each Boggle and fright, his Eye, his Ear, his
Nostril, every limb throughout appears in a fresher perfection.

A Saint, when his Graces become his Armor, Faith when a shield, Hope when a
Helmet, Righteousness when a Breast Plate etc. Then have you a Saint in a most
taking beauty. A Christian cannot exercise any Grace at such a time, but what
is of proof and Grace indeed, Grace in strength and vigor. When the Church is
in Conflict, when as an Army with Banners, then Christ as one taken with her,
cries out Thou art beautiful -- O my Love thou art comely, Cant. 6.4. And how
earnestly does he beg another look while she is in this posture verse 13.
Return Return O Shulamite that we may look upon thee.

The Lord himself never appears in so glorious a presence as when the LORD OF
HOSTS. And what a Glory was that in which Christ shined when Judas with his
band of men came to take him, I am He, says Christ, and no sooner spoke it,
but being astonished they fell backward John 18.6. so you that are our
Magistrates, our gods here amongst us, whatsoever there is of true excellency
in you will at such a time radiate and show it self. And if to be steady and
resolute in a matter of Justice and Piety, seem vile in the Eyes of others and
they deride, your resolution will rise with David's even to be more vile. Where
Grace is in pretense and show only, like the stony ground, there will be a
withering in such heats and conflicts, for what we only seem to have, is now
taken away, But to him that has at such a time especially, it shall be given:
Therefore such men in their Conflicts will be as Jacob in his wrestling He was
for power with God as a Prince Genesis 32.28. such was the perfection and glory of
his Graces appearing in that conflict Having therefore the advantages of this
posture of Nehemiah to draw his perfections more to life, I shall now show you
the Graces and Virtues in particular that are so eminently conspicuous in this
Man, heigthned and shineing forth in this his conflict and victory, which ought
to be attended and looked after in whomsoever you shall this day choose for
your Nehemiah.

They are these.

First you have in this Man a public Spirit; shall I go into the Temple to
save my life? shall I prefer my private before the public? There is one thing
more to a Man then life, his Eternity, immortalitatem quidem contra Rempublicam
non acceperim, said a Heathen. Moses and Paul knew what they said when those
transcendent and unparaleld expressions of a public Spirit broke forth. Exodus
32.32. Romans 9.3. But to keep in the rode of what is exemplary and imitable,
There is nothing in this World deerer to us than life. Job. 2.4.

Yet where a public Spirit, how easily and freely will such a Person prostrate
and lay his very life as an out-work for the Defense and Security of the
public. Esther a woman, and that Sex most tender, and timorous of death,
especially when in so much prosperity, yet having the welfare of her people in
her Eye, how confidently does she engage, and with what a manly resolution
defy all personal concerments, IF I PERISH I PERISH, Magistrates are Shepherds
Mich. 5.5. Esaias, 44.28. the good Shepherd says Christ, will not flee and
secure himself, leaving his sheep to the Wolf but the good shepherd will give
his life for the sheep, Joh. 10.11.12.

Shall I go into the Temple to save my life? the actings of a public Spirit
rise up here to a very high degree, it is a resolution: (such is his zeal for
the public) as he will not put it upon so much as an Hazard to secure his
nearest concerments, no not lire it self. I say hazard, for it was not a
certain loss. It was not said if you go into the Temple, you ruin all, but it
was told him peremptorily, and by a Prophet, and the time when and the manner
how, his life would certainly be lost, if he did not take refuge there, and at
that time he knew not the contrary, for it was afterward perceived by him
verse 12.

Magistrates ought not to put the welfare of the Public upon the least hazard
for the ascertaining their own enjoyments, though of greatest importance, This
man would never have been brought to put the public not only upon Hazard but
certain loss and detriment, as it is too frequent amongst us, for the securing
to our selves or friends, matters of less importance then life. It Is a sad Omen
to find men Baruch like seeing great things for themselves, though they see at
the same time all going to ruin, the Lord breaking down what he has built,
and plucking up what he had planted Jer. 45.

Two things should awaken each of you to fear lest a private narrow spirit
should surprise you. The first and that which is more general, the Times we are
fallen into, long since before prophesied of 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. In the last days
shall come perilous times (perilous and dangerous to the public) for men shall
be lovers of their own selves Covetous, Proud, etc.

The perilous evil of a private spirit is there declared with its wretched
principles from which it arises, Men shall be lovers of their own selves, and
the immediate root of it Pride, a proffessed high esteem of themselves, when a
man seriously believes that he much excels others, as the Pharise Lord I thank
thee I am not as other men, accordingly he becomes a lover of himself, for what
we deem best we love most, and thence this private narrow spirit impropriates
all to it self as being most worthy.

1. They are said to be Proud. Pride Elevates, a proud man looks upon himself,
though indeed but a member, yet equal in value and worth with the whole Body
and reducing the whole body into one member, and destroy community to preserve
propriety, and if so, then where is the body as the Apostle speaks? this
destroys the very being of a Corporation, for its of the Essence of a Body to
be made up of many members, yea and each through humility, to be members one of
another, Romans 12. Let no man think of himself more highly then he ought -- for
we being many are one body and every one members one of another, verse 3, and
5. That which is the original of confusion in politic bodies, it is thinking of
our selves more highly then we ought, and accordingly our care and provision
will be for our selves as only worthy of it without any respect unto others,
hence the Apostle joins these together again, Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done
through vain Glory but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then
themselves.

The Second is, Lovers of our own selves; an immoderate love to our selves, it
seems by this expression that the love we bear to our selves, arises, not only
from the high opinion of our selves and conceit of a goodness and thence an
amiableness more in our selves then in other men, but also from an intimate
propriety, we are our OWN SELVES, we are more our own, and interest our selves
in our selves so much, as others are scarcely owned by us, or with any equal
regard as they ought, love is fed and nourished more plentifully from propriety
and interest then property or worth, So this self Love being in such a measure,
even pressed down and running over in their own bosoms there is no place for
that affection that should be extended to our Neighbors, and therefore in the
same Text they are said to be (...) without common affection, love is the most
extensive virtue and carries forth service with it which way soever it moves
serve one another in love, where love is kept in and set upon our selves only,
we will serve and care for none but our selves: hence the Apostle gives this
praise of love where rightly disposed 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. love puffs not up,
seeks not her own, by love we serve one another as well as our selves.

But more especially, and what is a more peculiar snare, to Citizens, Is their
breeding and Education, you have been al along for your selves and ever since
your apprentiship has bin out, ever since you have been free men you have set
up for your selves, whereby you are as it were habitually disposed, to bring
all you deal with to some good account to your selves, and private estates. It
will be found very hard when you come to be public Persons, to do otherwise
unless there be very great care and circumspection. The manifold monuments of a
public Spirit in the pious and charitable works extant in many parts of the
Nation show that diverse Honorable Citizens have had their minds raised to such
a public height that great things have bin done by their right hand that their
left hand knew not. Yet never the less this is an experienced truth, That
Persons that never raised but inherited their Estates, and better acquainted
with spending then getting, are thereby disposed to a more noble and free way
in public employments. What an instance of a free and generous spirit have you
in this man, Chap. 5.14. For the time that I was their Governor that is twelve
years, I and my Brethren have not eat the bread of the Governor, The alowance
the State made him, his due, not, as a gift, but debt, for its RENDER not GIVE
unto Caesar, Math. 22. But the Governors before me were chargeable unto the
people, yea even their Servants bare rule over the people, I continued in the
work, and my Servants, neither bought we any Land ver. 16. Moreover there were
at my Table one hundred and fifty Jews besides many others daily ver. 17. and
the provision he made was not only for necessity but delight Choice Sheep,
Fowls, store of all sorts of Wine, as ver. 18. yet for all this required not I
the bread of the Governor because the bondage was heavy upon this People. He
might in such a hard time, have laid down his table having so good an excuse;
and its further observable were plentiful Tables kept up by Governors only for
gluttony and excess or out of pride and vain glory, a man fearing God, would
have been glad of the opportunity to lay them down, But Nehemiah knew such
entertainments, kept up the dignity and honor of Government, and that these
vulgar encouragements do much sweeten the severity of Magistracy, and for these
and the like Reasons of State deems them so necessary as he will rather continue
them at his own charge, then either break up house or be chargeable to the
people in such bad times. This shows that this man was of a most exact Public
Spirit, and being united to the Commonality by his relation he becomes one
spirit with it.

2. He was a Man of HONOR, as persons of quality ought to be, 1. in knowing
their own worth and 2. in doing what is suitable to it. Such a man as I and such
a man as I flee. 1. What a man was he? Ans. A Governor a public person
engaged in public service for his Country. To be a Magistrate is to be a
person worth ten thousand of others, so the people told David 2 Samuel 18.3. They
are termed in scripture Dominions, Dignities or Glories Jude 8. Gods, and Sons
of the most high Psa. 82.6. this shows the great excellency of Magistracy,
that as of swearing Heb. 6.13. because not a greater to swear by, God swear by
himself: so because not a greater Name to give them, he names them from
himself, a name above all names, given only to Angels, the most excellent of
all Creatures, and to Magistrates who are the most excellent of al men. God
himself calls them gods and we esteem them worshipful; And for the
preservation of their just esteem Nature it self has taught, and Scriptures
owned such external respects and vestments of state as may distinguish
Magistrates from, and dignifie them above other men? Their Palace, Attendants,
Entertainments. A Sword, a Mace and other pagentries, according to the guise of
the Country, when they go abroad, These things are not ensigns of vain glory,
but the necessary vtensils, by which the worth and excellency of Magistrates is
notified to the common people, it being a language best understood by the
generality.

Accordingly Nehemiah understands and owns himself, as it he had said such a
one am I. The Governor of Jerusalem, of the people of God, such a one as ought
to have my mind raised suitable to all the honor, titles, observances, and
ensigns of greatness belonging to my place. And shall such a one as I fly? as
he has a spirit suitable to his place, so a deportment suitable to his spirit.
Shall I, such a one as I do such a thing, so much below me, unsuitable to me?

There is to each condition and rank of men a (...) a Comeliness, seemliness,
decorum, expedience, which if not regarded, we sin and transgress against the
honor and dignity of our place. Are you not carnal? and walk as men, 1 Cor.
3.3. why they were men it is true, and more, Saints, which is a higher order of
men, those that are mere men, men and no more, do such things with less blame,
so Magistrates, are not only men, but a higher rank and order of men. Besides
evils that are simply such we have in the Scripture mention of other matters to
be avoided, Ephesians. 5.3. Fornication and all Uncleanness -- let it not be once
named amongst you as becomes Saints. The needless mentioning of them is
forbidden as sin, the nameing of them, forbidden to Saints and under the notion
of uncomliness, and inconveniency verse 4. Though no transgression of any
express precept, yet if it be a breach of Common order (in such matters) it
becomes Circumstantially evil. That Is suitable in apparel to a man that is not
to a woman, and young men do such things as are not Comely in the aged, so a
private man may do that without blame, as is hateful in a Magistrate. There are
not only real evils, but things which have the appearance of evil, and ought to
be avoided, 1 These. 5.22. such things as being done by some persons or with
some Circumstances become in the eyes of others, a specimen or fruit of an evil
principle in the man. Paul refused Maintenance from the Corinthians when he
took it in other places, to avoid the appearance of a mercenary spirit, and
gives this as the reason 2 Cor. 8.21. We must provide for honest things not
only in the sight of the Lord but in the sight of men. There is nothing simply
evil or dishonest but what is so in the sight of God.

As Magistrates give Laws to their people, so the WONTS and CUSTOMS of a
People, in what is not simply evil ought to be a Law to the Magistrate, as well
as others. According to the general notion of what is Noble, Fair, Just,
Honest, in the esteem of the common people, if it be without sin or notable
error, we must and Magistrates and public persons especially must be subject
thereunto You have the heads of such Laws laid down, Phil. 4.8. Finally
Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are Honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, think of those things. These Laws have also their penalties and
rewards, from the multitude according as they are observed or neglected, namely
the general praise or reproach of men. A man shall be commended according to his
wisdom, but he that is of a perverse heart [he cares not whom or what he
Crosses] shall be despised Prove. 12.8. A man must be of vast merits in the eyes
of all men, that will be singular and of a peculiar humor and not be extremely
contemned.

This was the thing the enemies of Nehemiah would have put upon him, to do
unlike himself, and otherwise then what the Law of vulgar expectation laid upon
him, and upon Magistrates, Though there had been no dishonest thing in the
sight of God, and his life lay on it, yet if he should not have answered what
the World expected, they would have spoken evil and punished him with
Reproaches as verse 13. which he looked upon, and indeed is, a matter of great
Consequence to a Magistrate or person of public employment, Paul was of his
judgment and choice in such a case and professes, it were better for him to
die than that he should make his glorying void, 1 Cor. 9.15. Jesus Christ
himself engaged in public service, enquires how he stood in the opinion of men
Math. 16.13. What do men say of me?

As you are called gods, so mind your Glory, that is, know who you are, and do
like your selves, we can mind our selves, and who we are, if an affront or
neglect be given from want of observance from others, Shall such a one as I
bear it? do not you know my Lord Major? etc Let him and all in Authority know
themselves, and do accordingly and they will be acknowledged, their works will
discover and praise them in the Gate Prove. 31.

3. A man of Courage and Resolution, Constant and fixed in his Course; there is
nothing within or without shall daunt him, talk to him of danger, Death, advise
him to stoop but a little below himself, and it will be his security: No, says
Nehemiah a man of Courage will rather take the bullet, though it take his life
than make a stoop at the report to avoid it another man may do this, but it
becomes not a Soldier. Shall such a man as I flee? Shall I go into the Temple to
save my life? I will not go in, I will not save my life upon such terms.
Courage is requisite to those that are public persons in Civil as well as in
Military employment, hence they mutuate titles, as Dux, Eques, Armiger, Major
etc. Thus God to Joshua, Josh 1.6. Be strong and of a good Courage again verse
7. ONLY be thou strong and very Courageous, as if it were the All of a Ruler.
Shall I go into the temple? I will not go in, this repetition shows the
fixedness of his resolution, like that of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.12. What I do I will
do that I may cut of occasion from them that seek occasion etc. An uneven
unsteady Magistrate, is the same at sometimes, that an easy and weak one is at
all times, and the same advantages may be taken upon him, if we do but put our
selves to the trouble to wait our season. I have said you are Gods, ye shall
die like men, to be a god is to be above all fears, all Hopes, all Temptations,
to be immutable and not to appear so much as in the shadow of a change. Ye
shall die like men, til Death comes, you are gods, there shall be no diminution
of your godhead, of your greatness by me, if you diminish it not your selves,
keep up therefore a Courage answerable.

4. Wisdom, This is another Star in the Constellation, Nehemiah by his great
reach and depth of understanding, was able to see through all their Colors and
subtle pretentions To disappoint the devises of the Crafty, Job 5.12. is
mentioned as a Character of the greatest wisdom.

Elisha begs that the Spirit of Elias may be doubled upon him, because he was
to be a publickTeacher, that is, he must now teach himself and others, so a
Magistrate must seek of God a double spirit of wisdom, because he is not only
to govern himself, but a City A Nation. The least Star is sufficient to give
light to it self, but no less then a Sun is sufficient to inspect a world. The
want of wisdom in a Magistrate as it is of greatest detriment to his people, so
with greatest difficulty supplied. Men of weak and low parts have such
Jealousies of those that are more able, that for the most part they carry on
their Counsels rather with persons of the same proportion for wisdom with
themselves.

5. Holiness Nehemiah was a person that feared God, of great Integrity and
uprightness. It may be said of him as of David Psalm. 78.72. He fed them
according to the integrity of his heart and guided them by the skilfulness of
his hand, where skilfulness or wisdom and Integrity meets, it is of singular
advantage in Government, under such Governors We may lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all Godliness and Honesty. GODLINESS will thrive if planted in a City in
a Nation though the Governors be enemies to it, but this is that great and
choice blessing and Privilege enjoyed by a people where such persons Govern, we
may not only be Honest but Godly, and this not only in some parcels of devotion
according to the mode of the times, But in all Godliness, and these blessed
Privildges enjoyed, not in Corners and with difficulty and molestation, hunted
from place to place, but all godliness with a quiet and peaceable life where
such Magistrates, are over us. HONESTY with quiet and peace may be our portion
and enjoyed if a Heathen or Infidel were our Governor, But a freedom to be
Godly and according to this extent with quiet to be expected only where a
Nehemiah is Governor.

6. Humility, What a deal of this Grace, lies out visible in those few words
who is there that being as I am would do otherwise than I do. Although his
doing was so singular, as you will not find such Honor, such Courage, such a
public Spirit, no not in one Governor of a hundred, yet he assumes nothing
unto himself peculiar, I have done but what any man would have done. There are
that for doing half so much for the public think themselves to have merited
red Letters, and for half so much Self denial, ought to have a place in the
Calendar. Peter was a godly man a chief Apostle, yet found in as great a
distance in the frame of his spirit from this of Nehemiah's as the Compass of
Grace can well permit. Master says he Math. 26.23. though all should be
offended, yet will I never; He conceits himself singular for Courage and
Constancy and all, no man shall show himself so resolute, no man shall do as I
will do, yet found, even in this a very common person, and inferior to his
fellow Disciples.

Applic. 1. To you that are to choose, a great trust is committed unto you, the
welfare of the most famous City in the world, another Jerusalem, a City
inhabited by the people of God.

1. Be not Carried on in this work by old Cus-TOMS and WONTS, why should you
depute in so great a work so blind a Guide, yet we are brought to it in most
Elections, and thereby lose one of the choycest Privileges that belong unto us
as Citizens.

Moses chooses Joshna who was full of the spirit of wisdom, Where are such to
be found, if not amongst your selves? Covet the best Gifts, lower then what the
Apostle has about Widows, we may not go in placing this honor, 1 Timothy 5.3.
Honor Widows that are Widows indeed, choose such as may be Magistrates indeed
and not in show only; where Electors are thus Conscientious in this work, the
Properties, though not the Person of a good Governor will be the same every
year, and so hereditary, and for ever, though your Election be yearly.

2. Your Judgments rather than your Affections ought to be exercised in this
work. It Is God only that chooses persons from the good pleasure of his will,
and it is peculiar to his ELECTION, and so great a prerogative, as some are
unwilling to yield it him. But for us men, we must choose ex praevisis
operibus, Qualities and Virtues, rather than persons must be the most immediate
object of our choice, It is no error in the Doctrine of this Election, but much
of our duty this day is expressed in it, and accordingly I shall leave each man's
Conscience under this the Apostles charge, 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before
God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the Elect Angels that thou observe these
things without preferring one before another doing nothing by partiality.

3. I need not add, where there is so much Civility, what might be suitable, if
this Election were in some hands, namely, that though there be a Praeterition,
yet there must not be a Reprobation in your Election, How sadly men have
suffered in their names, and what advantages malicious minds have taken in such
competitions to sink men under Color of Comparison seeking their revenge, upon
the Credit and repute of whom they please, is not unknown to you. You may each
of you that are Electors commend your man and do it to the utmost, and yet
(according to that old and honest phrase) without Comparison.

Lastly, having elected your person, there is a special Obligation laid upon
you that are Electors, that you submit and yield Obedience unto the Person you
have chosen for your Magistrate, and it ought to be done with such freedom and
affection as that you may provoke and become examples unto others in the like
Obedience, for he is your choice, The great God and Governor of the world put
not himself upon us, no not upon those, of whom he expects his most peculiar
and affectionate submission. But as he has chosen them, so he enclines their
wills to choose him, and this because cause choice is the spring of all willing
and free obedience, And therefore Joshua, having a purpose to bring his people
into a more strict submission unto God, puts them upon a new Election of him,
Chap. 24. and having brought it to pass, he makes it solemn and signal, by
express stipulation ver. 22. And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are Witnesses
against your selves, that ye have chosen you (or for your selves) the Lord to
serve him, And they said We are witnesses. Witness against your selves, if now
you be disobedient having chosen him, for out very Election, is a choosing to
serve, as the phrase is there, a choosing to submit, to obey; yea and to bring
others also into obedience with you, Joshua undertakes not only for himself,
but his Household, ver. 15. to submit where he has made choice: do you
likewise, in your own persons and all your relations honor and obey whom this
day you shall choose, and as you of the Common Counsel of this City, in this
choice go before and represent others, so in your submission and assistance be
Examples unto others.

If he be not worthy, whom you have chosen, it will be your unhappiness but not
dispense with your duty, if he be an Idol, he is the workmanship of your own
hands and you that have made an Idol must be contented to bow down and worship
it.

Applic. II. to you that shall this day be chosen our Governor, our Nehemiah,
now begin to be a God, the name is coming upon you, meet it with a suitable
frame of Heart, that you may not take his name in vain, be you holy as he is
holy, like minded, like affected, love what he loves, persons, things, and hate
what he hates, yea with a perfect hatred. Whatsoever your hand finds out to do,
do it with all your might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in the grave, whither thou go, Eccl. 9.10. While you are gods, and
in place, be like your selves, afterward you become men again, you are (as it
were) in the grave, and then you are like other men, Moses prays that he might
be able to number his days, and know how long he had to live, that he might
apply his heart to wisdom, your days are numbered to you, you know to a day,
the longest day you are to govern, make the same use of it, meditate your duty,
as it has been showed you in Nehemiah, I cannot go over all the particulars,
but this is a principal one and to be remembered in the first place. Be of a
public Spirit, there is but one Lord Major for the whole City, as but one Sun
for the whole world, you must travail a greater compass that you may be light
and comfort to both Hemispheres, to the Ministers, to their people, to all
persons in all places, to rich, to poor, to servants and Masters, to Orphans
and Widows etc. If you be an Olive tree, you must not say, shall I leave my
fatness? or a Fig tree, shall I forsake my sweetness? no though you be a Vine,
you must leave your fruitfulness, that is, to bring forth to your self, which
if you do, you will be accounted an empty Vine. Consider, 1. You are men, men
of note and eminency before this choice, It will be for your own honor and
comfort, how desirable is it for any of you to have the story of his life, the
story of his Mairolty, to end like the story of Mordecai Esth. 1.1. Mordecai
was next to the King, great amongst the Jews, those that profess godliness
seeking the wealth of his people; not his own profit. There is also great
Equity in it, for therefore he receives perquisites that being Gods Minister he
may attend continually upon this thing. Romans 13.6.2. You are Christians, and as
such, you pretend to the most public end as your chief, the glory of God, now
there is nothing conduces more hereunto, then this, to be of a public spirit,
1 Cor. 10.31. whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God, how shall we so do
verse. 33. even as I please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit,
but the profit of many. Paul was able to forbear the glory of Heaven, that he
might be serviceable here on earth. Phil. 1.23, 24.

FINIS.

