NEWS FROM BRUSSELS, IN A LETTER FROM A NEAR ATTENDANT ON His Majesty's PERSON.

To a Person of Honor here.

Which casually became thus public.



Printed in the Year, 1660.

A LETTER FROM Brussels.
Honest Jack,
THine, by T. L. our true Post-pigeon, and (I would I could not say) only
expeditious person, was mine before the morning; and our Masters the same
minute, who took no small delight therein: for he read it thrice, and is
resolved (and swore to boot) thou art the first shall kneel under his sacred
Sword. Sir C. C. has his heart, and at first view he thought of wafting
thither, lest he should think his loyalty was slighted: but H. I. and I.
advised otherwise, and with some a do diverted that intent, and got him to
signify his Royal pleasure in the enclosed; which, instantly dispatch by
Minyard way: F. H. has always passage ready. Sir M. M. two hours after brought
good news from his cold Country; but Calvin smells too rank for us to venture
thither: they first betrayed his Royal Father, and after that his sacred self:
nor are our fortunes now at that low ebb, to reimbarque our all in that
old-leaky-bottom. Prithee persuade Sam. to be silent, tell him it is our
Masters pleasure. Think thou none knows, as well as he who first conjured up
this Devil, and cursed them that would not curse and fight against His Majesty
in Meroz name: yes, we can look though through our singers: this Rebellion
first bubbled up in Presbyterian Pulpits, yet it is impollitick to say so much:
we also know it is more for fear of the Phanatiques than for love to us, they
now are loyal: so also it is our necessity, not choice, that makes us court
them: Hug them you cannot hang, at least until you can: would Lall: had longer
lips; I hate to show the teeth before we bite: we choke our Dogs with Crusts as
well as Pins, no Curre will eat a Pin alone; a blew Ribbon and a Star we know
will unbecome a Rebels shoulder, but Fishes bite at baits; he is an Ass that
angles and hides not his Hook: How most unhappy is my Sovereign Lord, that the
impatience of his Friends should be as perilous to his fortunes, as the Pikes
of his Enemies: we never yet well minded our next work; he is a Fool that
thinks when the Nedle's in the Thread will not follow: set then your helping hand
to this, let that alone; procure the cause and it is impossible to separate the
effect. But he comes in on terms? and is bound up? Tush! remember that blessed
line I marked in Machiavil; he is an Oafe that thinks an Oath, or any Tedder can
tame a Prince beyond his pleasure: Zerviah's Sons lived to David's great
dislike, but 'twas but til he could kill them more conveniently: and prithee
what did Shimei's pardon do but planch him up: they cannot abide to see his
house a Roundheadhive; it is true, it is much that any can: Are you yet to learn
to make Necessity a Virtue? who doubts but that C, Borgia did his business
better, by lulling Vitelloz asleep* than to have hazarded all by the uncertain
chance of Fortune; it is a Romance to think Revenge can sleep, but like a Dog,
to wake at will: It Is true, served we a Prince that needed spurs, this humor
might be cherished; but alas, we rather use all the Art and Arguments we can to
rein him in; had thou but seen his passion when M's Pedigree came over, thou
would have said he had steel enough -- Seal Rob. lips, I pray thee, for fear
it may disserve him at dinner; 'twas, and in some degree is, too public.
There needs no Record for a Rival; yet is it laid (by strict command) next
Murrey's Manuscript, and will one day be reviewed; til then Plantaginet's in
pickle. But I Will retain our (most absolutely necessary) discourse, for thy
farher satisfaction: can fancy, that our Master can forget he had a Father,
how he lived and died, how he lost both Crown and life, and who the cause
thereof? never Monarch yet had a memory half so bad: Never fear, there is fire
enough in his Fathers Ashes (though yet invisible) to burn up every Adversary;
only our clamorous impatience would have all at once: give time, he ascends
most safe that does't gradatim; overstraining not only spends the strength too
fast, but does endanger falling more: Remember our dread Liege Lord (if ever
guilty of an error) miscarried here; from what a hope fell he and we, for want
of following S. 's advice: All or none's a Game not for a Prince to play, but
Desperado's, whose fortunes rise and set with every Sun. The Presbyter will
give up the Phanatique, a handsome bone to pick at first: I like it better far
than all at once; excess brings surfeits: Thus half the beard they shave
themselves, let us alone with to other: Drown first the Kitlings, let the Dam
that litter'd them alone a little longer: They glory they are Orthodox; hear,
and hold still thy head, let us alone to find out fresh Phanatiques, and beat
them back into King Harry's Codpiece. We know the Sectaries had a Sire, and
whose spurious brood they are; even as the Puritan was the off-set of the
Protestant: Spain's Attach, revive as often as well thou can; it is a good
blind, and propagates our Masters Interest: Wat came since my last, and will
not let our Lord alone, till he sees a Lecture up in Court, and Chaplains
preach before him, ordained by the Presbytery: and one Waldense is come
already. O Jesu, Jack! I want an iron hoop to keep my sides from splitting, to
see my poor Prince hite's lips for half an hour long, while that Dulmano begs
a blessing (as he calls it) as our Mech-beggers do their Bacon at the Farmers
doors: G. got behind him yesterday and made mouths, which the Puppy by an
unhappy turn of his head perceived; but His Majesty seeing all, prudently
anticipated his complaint, and with a Royal gravity, not only rebuked G. but
immediately dismissed him his service.

We all made application to the Parson to mediate to our Master for G. his
restoration, which he did: and after much entreaty, his request was graciously
granted; but not for G. his sake, but for his, and not on future good behavior
neither: M. H. and I. were in the presence at night, but I thought we should
have split our spleenes a laughing: but by these means all was healed: and
henceforward we are all commanded to be plaguy-godly. H. bid me hand his
service to thee, he swears he has horned 15 Cuckolds within this 14 days. --
Mind the Militia most, talk not of disbanding, one pin naturally drives out
another. A. B. at parting swore he would see that execrable Exit raced out;
whom so assist he may not suffer. Let Th. continue his Caresses, and bid him
not jeopard such broad Joques no more; he says she stinks of Piss and
Horse-spice: D, F, C, and -- court upon all occasions: if M, M, and -- stand
right, we ask no more, City, Land, and Sea is our own: that Reformation likes
us rarely well, though we wonder he would hazard all upon such a rash
adventure. Bid Phil. and's Brother both be close; they now may list and none
the wiser: we dared not let the Nuntio see the Sun. We hope our friends droop
still, and curse him whom most they covet. -- Let not thy Lady know our Italian
tie: the Devil cannot track us if we 3 keep our tongue within our teeth. Fret
not nor afflict thy self nor friend, for we resolve, the Rogues that left the
Rump, shall feel the scourge that Loyal hearts lash Rebels with, as well as
others; a Roundhead is a Roundhead; black and white Devils all alike to us. --
Think thou that we can breath in peace, while we see a little finger left
alive that has been dipped in Royal blood? or his adherents? No, a thought of
mercy more hateful is than Hell: but Cooks may be conquerors, and a plate
perform equal execution with a Pistol, and with less report. Be quiet then,
let us use all art to make them take the halter tamely. Press the speedy
raising of the City Regiments. -- And out the Rogue at Stern: what folly is it
to think we can safely ferry while the Fleet's Phanatique? This done, let our
cause miscarry if it can. Maz. met Wat, and gave him sound advice. -- Get Arms,
but buy them not in such suspicious numbers: that if all fails, we may repair
to them, and cut our passage to the Throne through Traitors blood. Farewell.

Brussels, S. V. March 10. 1659.
FINIS,

