A Public DISCOVERY, OF THE OPEN BLINDNESS OF Babels Builders, and their
confused Language, who have been Building without, till they deny Faith,
Knowledge and the Gospel Light within, the Law of the New Covenant, and matter
of the New Creature.

Plainly laid open in an Answer to a Book Entitled A Public Discovery of a
Secret Deceit, Subscribed John Deacon, in behalf of some who pretend a Call to
the Ministry.

Wherein their first Queries, their Replies; their Answers to my Queries, and
their last Queries is answered, and their whole Work laid open, and the end
thereof with Queries sent back, by them to be answered, that their boasting
Spirit may be farther revealed, and its blindness.

Here is also some of their confusions taken out of the heap, and set by
themselves to be seen, how they will stand in the eye of Truth, where but the
least measure of God is known.

By an enemy to deceit, but a friend to the Creation, called James Naylor.

The time is come that they who seek to kill us, think they do God service; and
this do they, because they know not the Father nor the Son.

London, Printed for Gil^s C^lv^rt, at the Black Spread-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul, 1656.

An Answer to several Replies, Answers and Queries, subscribed JOHN DEACON.
AND seeing that (when you come to speak for your manner of preaching and
expounding in your 48. page and other parts of the Book) your work goes on in
the number of more then one, saying an evidential command we have etc.
Therefore I must give an Answer to more then one, and to such as pretend a call
to the Ministry also; so to you all I direct my Answer as follows.

Quere. 1. If every man that comes into the world have light in him sufficient
to salvation, how then do you say that I am in darkness? for either you must
grant your first or second Assertion to be false, or prove me not come into the
world, or not born of a Woman?

Answer 1. The cause why thou art in darkness, is because thou do not believe
and follow that light which is sufficient according to Christ's words, John 8.
12. For they that turn from the darkness to the light, have the promise; but
the unbeliever is condemned in darkness, yet is the light sufficient, John 3.
15, 16; 17, 18, 19.

Reply answered. In this Reply, though nothing said to disprove my Answer, nor
the Scriptures that proves it; yet you vent what is in the vessel, calling me a
Deceiver, a Wolf, and a Serpent; but had not your rage overcome your wisdom,
you first would have proved me so, before you had so called me; but I have the
less cause to be troubled, seeing the Servant does but share with his Lord. You
that are not afraid to say, as Satan is a Serpent, so is Christ; its not like I
should be counted any better by you. Yet one thing I tell you that to say that
Christ is a Serpent, so as the Devil is, is no less then Blasphemy: and so it
would have been accounted, had any said it, but who is free born in the Kingdom
of the Murderer.

2. Quer. If that light be universal that is soul-saving, shall all be saved,
yea or no?

Answ. 2. All that believe, shall; but he that believes not, the light is his
condemnation, John 3. 19.

Reply answered. In this you are angry that I should witness the light of
Christ sufficient, because all are not saved. And for this I am accused, to
pretend a private light, and for false doctrine, but seeing it is no falser
then that which Christ and his Apostles taught, it matters not much of the
judgment of the blind guide; the way is not the worse, so it be but proved to
be right, John 8. 12. Says Christ, I am the light of the world, he that
follows me shall have the light of life. And John 12. 36. Says Christ, believe
in the light, that you may be the Children of light: wherein Christ declares
the light to be sufficient to all that will believe; but of some he says, ye
will not come to me that ye may have life, Joh. 5. 40. and to such he says,
your destruction is of your selves: but does not say his light is to blame, or
not sufficient, but their unbelief. And the Apostle says the same, Heb. 4. 2.
For unto us was the Gospel preached, as unto them; but it did not profit them,
not being mixed with faith; but says, we which have believed do enter, but
they to whom it was first preached entered not, because of unbelief; but does
not say, the light of the Gospel is in that's the Devil who blames the light of
Christ, to clear the unbelievers. O what darkness has covered the blind guide,
is there some light of Christ not sufficient? Did ever any bear such a
testimony of the true light that lights every one that comes into the world?
Ioh. 1. 9. you never came so far as Iohus Baptism, who are witnesses against
John, against Christ, and his Apostles.

3. Quer. If you say yea, I quere farther; How is it then that you say I am
damned, and where is the Reprobate?

Answ. 3. Thou art damned by thy unbelief, Ioh. 3. 18, 19. And where Christ
the light of the world is not known within, but denied, there is the Reprobate,
2. Cor. 13. 3. 5

Reply answered. In this you swell high, and call me liar often, if the first
word may carry it, but we will try the matter, and turn the lies to the liar.
First you say that I say he is damned, which thing you say in your first Quere,
to which I have but showed him the cause why, but never said by me otherwise
then in answer to your own words. Secondly, you say, I say he believes not,
which is another lie, as you charge it to be my saying (though in him true) so
take these two lies back, and go to the latter end of your Reply; and there is
a third, where you say, that I say Christ is in the Reprobates as well as
Saints; and yet your selves so stark blind in the same Reply, charges me to
abuse the Text in saying that where Christ is not known within, there is the
Reprobate which I own for truth, 2 Cor. 13. 5. but that I abuse the Text
therein, is a fourth lie, as the words shall witness who reads them. So these
four lies being returned to the founders, you have your Reply to my Answer yet
to make. And whereas you say the Sun cannot be hid, I ^^y ^o all who reads your
work, and knows the Son risen, I leave it to be judged, if to you he be not set
in obscurity, and you Children of the night, far darker then the Clouds.

Quer. 4. If this light ought only to be minded, and all external means
utterly abolisht, I Query wherefore you teach, and to what end serves the
Scriptures, which were for the making perfect the man of God? 2 Timothy 3. 1, 6, 7.

Answ. 4. We teach to turn peoples minds to the light and word, which is the
one thing needful to be minded, 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 1. 10 8. And the
Apostle preached that word to the people which was in their hearts, Romans 10. 6,
7, 8. And their preaching was to open the blind eyes, and to turn from
darkness to light, and so from the power of Satan, unto God the Father of the
light, Acts 26. 18. And the Scripture serves for declaring and testifying that
th^s Christ is he that is the light of the world, and lighteneth every one that
comes into the world, and the Savior of all that believe, John 12. 46. John
1. 9. 1 Timothy 4. 10.

Reply answered. As you made up your last with lies, so you begin this, saying,
that I grant that all external things are useless, none excepted; when I speak
not a word to that purpose, but witness the word and the light thereof, to be
the one thing needful; nor does confessing this, make useless any thing that
God made: only it makes the hirelings and false Prophets useless, as to
teaching, who have not the word and light in them. Another lie is that I say
the light in every man is not sufficient to lead out of all the ways of the
dark world. And a third is, that I grant the Scriptures to be useless. A fourth
is, that we cry that down in others that we preach up in our selves. And a
fifth is, that I once denied preaching. So these five feet being struck off,
the Reply falls to naught, and my Answer stands as it was at the first, only
some rambling words nothing to the purpose, which I forbear to mention, lest I
should be as vainly employed in repeating as you in raising them.

5. Quer. And if that the external means be useless, to what end were those
most sacred gifts bestowed upon men? Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12. And how the end and
intent for which they were given became void?

Answ. 5. The end of those gifts was for perfecting the Saints, and bringing
all into one faith unto a perfect man, which they that teach that none can be
perfect by those gifts while they live, do set up a faith in people contrary to
the end of those gifts; and by setting up external things in stead of these
spiritual gifts, have you lost the gifts, and have made them void, and so are
become enemies to the end and intent of them in others who have them and
believe the end of them: And thus the end and intent for which they were given,
are become void to you, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12.

Reply answered. This also is made up of great swelling words, and challenges,
and charges, which are false, as you charge them upon me; as that I said in my
Answer, that thou John Deacon had set up external things, and so made void the
end of the spiritual gifts, and this you make into three or four lies to father
upon me, when my words are, They that teach that none can be perfect do so; but
did not mention thee John Deacon, nor intend it; for I never looked upon thee
as one of those Teachers, thou never had that wit, though malice enough, to
make a cover for one who dare not be seen, lest his works be brought to light.
So these boults turn back upon the makers, with the rest in the former, and the
Secret Deceit is seen you tell on. But the word perfecting the Saints sticks
much on your stomach, and so I am charged to produce a President, of one person
in all the Scripture, that ever was perfect by any means; and your penalty is,
else yield my self a liar: but why a liar? because I say the end of those
gifts was for perfecting the Saints; and must not Paul be a liar with you also,
who said so before me, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12. And can you believe if I produce a
President in Scripture: however since I am charged therewith, and you ignorant
of it, I shall set you where you may find more then one, Job 1. 8. Prove. 11. 5.
Psalm. 37. 37. 1 Cor. 2. 6. Phil. 3. 15. Colos. 1. 28. and 4. 12. Jam. 3. 2.
Genesis 6. 9. Luke 6. 40. Heb. 10. 14. 1. These. 5. 2. Search these Scriptures
over, before you conclude me a lvar, so shall I not be alone herein. But now
what Reply to my Answer, further then a liar to wit, that I do wrest the
Scripture and your meaning, which I quote as it is without the least meaning or
wresting at all.

Quer. 6. If natural light be sufficient without the help of the means, what
then is become of the work of grace? Ephesians. 2. 5. 8. Romans 11. 6. and of the
growth of faith, Luke 17. 5. Mark. 9. 24. The practical use of Ordinances, 1
Cor. 11. 2. 23. 24. As Baptism. Matthew. 8. 19. The Lords Supper, Reading 1 Timothy
4. 13. Preaching, Matthew. 28. 20. and several other places, Prayer, 1 These. 5.
17. Romans 12. 12. Communion of Saints in public Assemblies, Heb. 10. 25.

Answ. 6. The light of Christ is the gift of the grace of God which brings
salvation, which teaches to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11. 12. And with
this light is the work of grace seen; but thou that call this natural light,
or would make people believe it is not sufficient, must needs be ignorant of
that spirit, whereby that work of grace, and growth of faith, prayer, and
communion of Saints, Supper and Ordinances is known; for without faith in the
light of Christ, these are not known nor accepted, though dark natural
imaginations may make an imitation from them in the Letter, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And
thus are the works of grace become to all that deny the light and spirit of
Christ within, and take up a tradition from the letter without sensual, having
not the spirit, Jude 19.

Reply answered. The Reply to this Answer, is, O deceitful Sophister! and so,
because you cannot enter upon my Answer, yet to your old trade of lying, your
way is open, that I deny the work of grace, faith, the growth of faith, by the
use of Ordinances, most if not all; and that I wave the Question, when as I
tell you what is become of the work of grace, to all that deny the light, and
what the gift of grace is, which is more rather then less then was asked me.

Quer. 7. Whether the Bible be the written word of God, yea or no, if not, what
means the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 36. 37. 38. Gal. 1. 10. 11. 1 These. 2. 13.

Answ. 7. That is the word which the Bible declares of, which is invisible and
eternal, which they that received i^ of God, and had it in their hearts, did
speak, or write it down, which writing they called a declaration, Luke 1. 1. 1
John 1. 3. But does no where say the Bible is the word, but God and Christ is
the word, Jeh. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 25. And of this word the Apostle means, which
was of God, and not of man, nor by man; and the word of God is the name of
Christ, and not the name of the Bible, Rev. 19. 13.

Reply answered. Your Reply to this is, Thou blind sot, and why so? because I
will not confess the Bible to be the word of God. And in the conclusion of your
heedless Reply you say your selves, that for the Scriptures to say, the Bible
is the word of God, is absurd to imagine; so because I will not say that which
is absurd for the Scripture to say, I am a blind sot, and this out of your own
mouth, and why is not the Scripture a blind sot also, seeing it will not own
your Quere no more then I do? seeing we are guilty both alike, why should you
judge partially? And for your Co-essential Word, and your Coeternal Word, and
your Temporal Word, and your Expressive Word, the Scripture knows no Word by
these names, no more then your Bible Word, but you who have lost the true Word,
have got so many strange imagined words, till the Scripture will not find you
name for them. But we can describe one word in Scripture language, but its
absurd (as you say) both to the Scripture, and us, to own what you imagine. So
I had rather be a sot with the Scripture, then a Serpent without it. And the
Apostles preached Christ the spirit, and not the letter, but the Sell-Sermons
knows not that; and so must preach such as they have for money: and if the
Bible be not the word, they may truly say they know none: so it stands in
hand, lest they lose their gain: but which of the Ministers of Christ came with
a Book, saying, this is the word of the Lord, and preached out of a verse, And
whereas you say John makes a distinct difference between the word of God and
the testimony of Jesus, that is false also.

Quer. 8. If the Ministry now established be Antichristian, where then, and who
be Orthodoxal?

Answ. 8. Those Ministers who have their Authority from Christ, are such as
abide in the doctrine of Christ, and these are they who are hated of the world,
and ever was, for crying out against the deceits and filthiness of the world,
Priests and people; and whereas thou ask where they are? I say in Goales and
Prisons in this Nation, many of these are for the same now, by means of those
who live out of the Doctrine of Christ, and in the steps of the false Prophets,
Scribes and Pharisees, seeking for their gain, bearing rule by their means,
being called of men Masters, etc. all which are forbidden by Christ, and for
bearing witness against such, much innocent blood has been shed, though they
ever call themselves Orthodoxal, and the Ministry of Christ established by men.

Reply answered. In this Reply you lay a heavy charge upon me, as a Jesuit,
and that I sprung from the Romish Priests, and much such like; which had been
well beseeming first to have proved, and then have condemned; But
notwithstanding I must tell you I am not of that line nor descent; for I am
able to abide the search herein, and shall not be found in the least favor
with that brood; therefore you are wilfully mistaken. Had we been of those whom
the Pope has done so much for, as for many others of his own descent, who
descended from the Bishops, who descended from the Pope: had he created us
Masters over Towns and Parishes, and builded us great parsonages to live in,
and caused poor people to labor for us, to keep us idle, and our families, and
provided us ways to take it by force where they denied our demands; had he
builded us Houses, Idols, Temples, and consecrated them for us, and set up a
worship therein, or may best suit our authority, and none to question it, but a
Law by him provided to secure us, and hale them to prison without Bail or
Mainprise, whom the Lord should send to speak against it. Or did we continue in
the Relics of his superstitious worship, though we denied him in words, and
yet lived in all this from him, then there might be some cause to say we sprung
from Romish Priests, and were branches from that Grove of Heresy; but that we
should deny all this, and testify against all this, and the rest of the Papal
worship, root and branch; nay if any of us be moved of the Lord to come into
any of his houses to declare against all this, we are not suffered to speak,
and yet be thus accused by such as live in this, and worship in it, this is but
hard measure: but being innocent, we are able to bear it; and when it comes to
such as are guilty, see you kick not at it. And whereas you say we accuse you
to be out of the Doctrine of Christ, because you are not one with Rome; that is
false, it is such as are in the Relics of the Romish worship, who are called
Masters by their Hearers, bear rule by their means, teach for the fleece,
preach for hire, and c. such as was hirelings, that Christ and all his denied;
for the same practice do we deny now; and if any come out of those, and the
rest of the Popish ways, we deny you not, not while you are therein we may not
own you, lest we deny the Lord. And you say your being called Masters, is
cleared by reverend Mr. Baxter, answer him if I can: I say, I have answered
him, and you may reply thereupon, seeing he has not that I know of; and my
saying that Christ forbids his Ministers to be called Masters, you say is a
damnable lie, so let the words of Christ, Matthew. 23. 8. 10. judge the liar and
condemn him. And you challenge me to prove it, that ever any died for that
cause we now stand for, I say yea, some have been beaten and bruised even in
your Idols Temples, till they have been carried out, and their blood shed, and
have died ere they recovered; others have been thrust in holes and prisons, and
there dyed, which blood will be required, though yet you are not come to
burning, but some are hastening toward it; if God so permit, it will be seen.

Quer. 9. Since that you say that Presbyterians, Independents, and the like
differing Forms are of Babylon, and under the destruction thereof; I Quere who
are out of it; and where is the true Church?

Quer. 10. And if you say a small number of Quakers, I Quere again, where then
has the Church of Christ been since his Passion, for this 1600. years and
more? till this upstart Faction spread it self abroad like an infectious
cloud; for if in all this time there were no Church, then could Christ be no
Head without a Body, nor no Husband without a Spouse, nor a Savior without a
People saved.

Answ. All forms differing from the light of Christ, are in Babylon darkness
and distractio^, and the true Church is in God, 1 These. 1. 1. Such only are
out of Babylon, who are gathered out of the world by the spiritual light of
Christ, and there has it been ever since his Passion, and he has never been
without, though but in a small number which he has saved, which the world
hated and scornfully miscalled, and into prisons and corners have they been
driven all this time of the man of Sin, and his Papal Priesthood; but now he is
come, who is spreading his truth, and multiplying his seed as a cloud to the
Egyptians, wherefore the Heathen rage exceedingly. But it seems by thy Quere,
that thou ownest the Church all along since the Apostles, to have been in the
multitude of the Popish Priests, rather then in the Martyrs, seeing thou
speak so scornfully of a small number to be the Church of Christ, who are so
contemptible, which the Church ever was, and so it is at this day, Luke 12. 32.
Mat. 7. 14. Mat. 20. 16.

Reply answered. In this you say you believe I speak truth, and that I tell you
here nothing but what you knew before; and yet you murmr at it, and cast your
lies upon it; saying, that we grant our selves to be none of Christ's Church;
which who reads my answer may read what you have there to ground that lie on;
so though I speak what you know is truth, and confess too, yet it must not pass
without lying and reproach; but you show your nature; and for that you would go
under the name of what they was that suffered; I say the name will not cover
you, when you are as far from their nature as the sufferer from the persecuter:
and your Priests are Lords over us now, as your fathers the Bishops was over
them, and whatever the dispensation is, the persecuter is ever in the error,
though the sufferer* bear the reproach and sufferings also: and so it is now,
though the persecuter has changed his name and form, yet the same malice and
work you are in.

Quer. 11. Whether you own the Resurrection of the body after death? If not, of
what does and shall Christ's Kingdom consist, for he can be no King without his
Subjects?

Answ. I say yea, the Resurrection I own, according to the Scriptures.

Reply answered. In this you are not satisfied with a Scripture answer, much
less would you with mine, and so puts it off with laying a slander on some
namelesse man.

Quer. 12. Whether you acknowledge the Trinity of the Persons in the Godhead,
the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, oue substance, but three in subsistence
or manner of beings?

Answ. For the word Trinity, thou may send it to Rome from whence it came;
but God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and that these three are one, I
know and acknowledge according to the Scriptures, 1 John 5. 7.

Reply answered. Your Reply to this is, O subtle Deceiver, and c. And what is
the fault, because I will not own your word Trinity, though I own the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, yet if I do not decline the Scripture phrase, and
take up the Romish, I am a Deceiver and Etymologer, and my pen stinks, and c.
Well, be it so, such a Deceiver I shall be, to own the Scripture and the sound
words therein, against all your Popish inventions: And when you have thus
railed against me, because I will not own it; then you accuse me for bringing
it from Rome; So that its a thing impossible to escape your tongues, who are
bent for mischief every way; but it matters not, seeing the reproach of the
wicked is not only safe but great riches. Much more such smoke foames out at
the pits mouth, but not worth heeding: such a Reply, you may return to any
Answer, which is naught but bitterness and cursing, and reviling, so that you
forget to speak to the Answer.

Quer. 13. Whether Jesus the Son of Mary incarnated in the flesh, God-man in
one person, who died at Jerusalem upon the Cross, rose from the death to life
the third day, and ascended on high into the highest heavens, and sits on
the right hand of God, be the true Messiah, as that you own and say is within
you?

Answ. Jesus the Son of God, and Eternal Word, which came down from God, became
flesh, born of the Virgin, God and Man, who died at Jerusalem, rose again,
ascended, and sits at the right hand of the Father, the true Messiah, which
Christ we own to be within us, which no carnal mind which denies his light can
comprehend, and Christ in you except ye be reprobates; 1 Cor. 10. 4.

Reply answered. This you say is in some sort satisfactory, but yet you say you
have no faith to believe Christ within us; I say I know you have not; for did
you believe Christ within, there could not issue out all this mud and confusion
uncondemned: but though you cannot believe, yet you can sl^nder that we are
deluded: but I look on it as the fruits of your unbelief, and so pass it as
not worth heeding, being but a slander unproved.

Quer. 14. Whether the soul of man be mortal or immortal? if mortal, for what
then did Christ Jesus suffer to purchase eternal glory, and what profits
holiness in life? if immortal, where then shall it abide after death, since you
say there is no heaven nor hell, but in a man's conscience?

Answ. The first part of this Quere I answer, the soul is immortal; but the
latter part being made up of a lie, I return it back into thy Fathers Bottle,
from whence it came, till thou have proved that ever I said there is no heaven
nor hell, but in a man's conscience.

Reply answered. In this reply you call me Secret Deceit, and Liar, because I
tell you of a lie you cast upon me in your Quere, to wit, that I say there is
no heaven nor hell but in a man's conscience, and because I will not bear it in
silence, but lays it open to be a lie, therefore I am called Secret Deceit,
for laying open your Secret Deceit, and now another must bear it who is not
hear to answer for himself; and so to excuse the lie, you have discovered the
backbiter, who is shut out of the kingdom with the liar. And now Rich.
Hubberthorn is named, but you dare not say he ever said it, least he should be
nearer then you are aware to disprove you; but least you should fail, now you
slander all our fraternity (as you call it) therewith which in truth is as much
as to say no body; for I am one, but you clear me, saying, you cannot prove it
against me, so not all our fraternity; so take the lie back til^ you find a
Father for it, for with us it rests not. Also take the other with it, which
says that it is usual with me to speak that in one breath, which I will deny
with another: which when you prove I shall receive the lie; till then let it
rest upon the Founder. For your scoffing at the plow, I am not ashamed of it,
knowing it to be a lawful employment, much better then the hireling that works
not at all, but lives on other men's labors, taking by violence, what is other
men's labors; but seeing the plow is a reproach with you, why should not the
tithes be so also, which are a fruit of the plow, but it seems there is a
generation to whom the plow is a reproach, but the sheaves gentile, but the
scorners will do scornfully.

Quer. 15. If you are perfectly f^ee from sin, as you assert you are; what then
is the sting of death? or are you in the flesh immortal on earth.

Answ. 15. The former part of this Quere I return thee back, wi^h the latter
part of thy foregoing, being both of one root; but to the latter part I answer,
where the new birth is witnessed, which is not of corruptible seed, but
incorruptible, partakers of the Divine Nature, the life of Christ, made
manifest in mortal flesh; and where life and immortality is brought to light,
there the sting of death is seen to be abolisht on earth; but this Cains
generation knows not where death reigns, and therefore would murder such as
are translated from death to life.

Reply answered. In this after your old manner your Reply is, O incomparable
hypocritical liar! And forthwith a challenge is made to try the contest,
whether you or I be the liar. And you say, my own writings must decide the
Controversy: And the charge is, that I have said expressly, them who say they
have faith, and yet their life is not the life of Christ, and say they cannot
be saved from their sins in this world but in part, them and their faith we
deny: So if I have not denied this in my Answer to this Query, then you are the
liars; but if I have, then I must be he: but have you not here with your hasty
railing lost your senses, to put your case to trial in so plain a thing, where
there is not the least show of a word, seeming to deny this in the whole
Answer, neither is there one word here wherein perfection is asserted, so stay
till I assert it in my own behalf; till then your consequence from what
another said will not clear your quere of a lie, cast upon me, but afterward
you are made to confess your lies in both queries in these words, say you, for
charity take this, that the former part of my last query, and the latter part
of this, are both of one root, to wit, the false doctrine of your spirit, which
is a lying one: so you confess to what I told you they was, so the Controversy
is decided in this business, and the incomperable hypocritical liar, has
confessed to the lie, and what spirit it is of.

Que. 16. And if you have no sin, to what end is Christ beneficial as an
Advocate, Intercessor and Mediator; or is he no such?

Answ. 16. Christ that gives a man a light to see his sin, who redeems and
cleanses him from sin, is of use to us, and all that knows him as the
Mediator; and of use to keep his from the wicked one, and that he touches them
not, 1 John 5. 18. And the same who sets from sin, is he that keeps free from
sin; and this benefit we have by him as Advocate, Intercessor and Mediator,
Ephesians. 16. 17.

Reply answered. In this the pit mouth opens again, and outcomes, O Secret
Deceiver, with a lie at the end of it, and that is that I grant what I lately
denied: and that must be, that I asserted that I am perfectly free from sin.
With another lie on the Apostle John, the end of which is to deny Christ to be
an Advocate for the righteous where sin is not committed, your words are these,
But if any man sin (not else) we have an Advocate with the Father. And then you
conclude, if you have no sin, then is Christ useless. So by your Doctrine to
obtain the end of Christ's coming, which is to set free from sin, is to make
Christ useless, when the same Apostle says, He that abides in Christ sins not;
does he make Christ useless* or is it not he alone that can keep, that the evil
one touch not, in whom he is and they in him. But the liars never knew what it
was to be in him, nor kept by him, further then to ^nbolden your selves in the
worlds wickedness, by talking of him you know not. And it is no strange thing
to see you pervert my words all into a lie, when you date turn the Scriptures
into a lie, to deny Christ to be an Advocate, unless men sin, saying (not else)
which the Scripture says not; so he is no Advocate in prayer with you, and
spiritual worship, so you have said enough to show your knowledge in Christ as
he is Advocate, Intercestor and Mediator.

Quere. 17. And if you be perfect in purity; what is the cause you are not also
perfect in glory?

Answ. 17. Perfect glory is perfect purity, and every one according to their
measures are glorified therewith; but this world knows not whose glory fades,
neither can they judge of it with their impure spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And of
this glory all the Saints have a measure in this life, but the world hates it.

Reply answered. What you say in this is suitable to the former, and one answer
is to both.

Quer. 18. And if you disown method in teaching, I Quere whether you have any
command against it? and whether you esteem better then uniformity?

Answ. 18. That method and teaching which is out of the Doctrine of Christ,
which is in the wisdom of man, and in the wisdom of words of man's wisdom out
of the unity of the light of Christ and his Spirit; this we see to be
confusion, and not uniformity, and against it we have a command, which was
judged with the spirit of the Apostles, so do we, 1 Cor. 2.

Reply answered. In this Answer I am rendered as a fool, though before a subtle
Sophister, and you say rather deserve to be laughed at, then in the least to be
replied to; I say, had you said as little to all the rest, you had showed more
wisdom, and less lying, though your scornful laughter I justify not.

Quer. 19. Whether ever intentively the Gospel was promised to be made known?
or practically, that it was made known without the means (to wit) the
Ministration of man? if not, why then do you resist it?

Answ. 19. The Gospel was made known and promised intnetively and practically
to the servants and children of God, without the Ministration of man, as to
Adam,

Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaiah, and all the Propets, John Baptist, Simeon, the
Shepherds, Paul, and diverse others; and the same he does at this day, and none
can limit him, nor do I resist what means he uses; but such as resist his
works, deny his light, and would limit him, Genesis 3. 15. Genesis 9, 9. Genesis 17. 7.
Luke 3. 20. Luke 2. 10. Gal. 1. 11, 12.

Reply answered. In this I am called blind Sophister again, and you say it
would be absurd to imagine that any should preach the Gospel of Christ, as from
themselves, though, say you, I dare presume to say you do; so that though it be
absurd so to say, yet you dare presume to say it; for your privilege is to
speak absurd things, and to presume so to do, yet not see your selves herein,
which did you mind the light, you might see the blind Sophister at home, but
this is not the first absurdity by many in your Book, which you have presumed
to cast upon me, though you have not confessed to them all, as to this. Also
this must not be without a lie more, which is, that I bring the means to
testify against it self, but cannot instance wherein, and when thou have
confessed that we preach the Gospel of Christ, and says, you dare presume to
say we do, then say you, but tell me, has that man any one spark of Grace or
Truth in him, that cannot see you are truthless? So to preach the Gospel of
Christ is a truthless thing amongst you; and such blind stuff as this you cast
out at random; nor have I denied any means in my Answer, that God is free to
make use on, as you would accuse, for I have learned otherwise then to limit
him, to means, or from means; in what he has not declared I am silent; but
this I say, what means soever he uses, the hireling is denied, and they whose
worship is not according to Scripture, as your high-place, worship is not,
neither in call, maintenance, nor manner of worship in any one particular; And
this I am ready to make appear when I shall be called thereto, not withstanding
^^^ the filthy venomous names you, have called me in your replies, which shows
your inside and the fruits of your Ministry, and serve most for that end, for
me they touch not, nor has your Replies in the least shaken my answers, though
your unclean languaege have shown your own foundation, and confusion thereon
builded.

Reply to the pretended Answers subscribed John Deacon, unto fourteen Queries
put forth by James Naylor.
Quere. I.

NOw seeing you so much oppose the light within, and spirit, and set up the
Letter for the Light; I say, seeing it is plain all the Saints had a light in
Spirit to guide them in ways accepted in all ages before the Letter was; if
you be spiritual men, give it in writing what that Light was, where it was and
how they came by it, when they had no Letter? or was it sufficient before the
Letter? is it the same now? or when, or how was it changed, and the Letter set
in its stead?

1. Answer and Reply. In the Answer to this Quere I am charged with a lie,
because I say you oppose the light within, and spirit, and sets up the Letter
for the Light; and yet in the Answer your great work is to deny the Law written
in the heart, and place it now in the Letter; and says the Gospel, is not
known by being within; and says it is one of the most principal Controversies
between us Christians and the Quakers, and says that which was once written in
the heart and was sufficient, is now become insufficient: and now since the
thing you have stated: that the Controversy must be, betwixt the Law that was
received at mount Sinai; which you call a lively Oracle, and that which God
has written in the heart; we will search the Scripture, for whom it bears
testimony, and with whom they side in this controversy, Jer. 31. God in ^es a
promise of the new Covenant after they had broken that which you call a lively
Oracle, and says God, this shall be my Covenant I will make with the house of
Israel, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his
Brother, saying, know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least to the
greatest. And Paul, Heb. 8. witnesses the same words, and says the first
Covenant was faulty. And in 2 Cor. 3. he calls that which was engraven in
stones the ministration of death, and said he he was not a Minister of it, but
of the spirit; for said he, the Letter kills, but the spirit gives life, and
says it is done away, that is in the letter: And David says of a righteous
man, the Law of God is in his heart, so that none of his steps shall slide,
Psalm. 37. 3^. and Paul says, the Law of Spirit and life in Christ Jesus made
me free from the Law of Sin and Death, and this Law you say is become
unsufficient, and yet with the same shameless mouth am I accused for a lie,
saying, you oppose the light within, and set up the l^^ter, behold your work,
and be ashamed you blind guides, who know not the light in you; your states,
you may read Ephesians. 4. 18* 19. and this blind work you have in hand is suitable.
And further to manifest your blindness, you say before that law, their sins
were no sins, so by your doctrine it were no sin for Cain to kill his Brother,
and Sodom, and the old world, suffered without sin by your Doctrine; and such
dark muddy stuff as this you utter, but leaves the Quere wholly unanswered.

Quer. 2. Reeing you say the Scripture is a Rule, declare in plainness, is the
whole Scriptures a Rule to all men and women to take up the practice thereof?
or how much of it is? and to how many people? and to whom in particular? seeing
the Saints in all ages had their particular commands, how may weak people know
which of their commands they must take up, and which they must not? and when
they have found the commands, where they must have the power? and whether that
which gives the commands, be not the power only accepted for performance? deal
plain herein, that people may know what to do, and what they have done; that
they be not always learning, and never able to come to the end of their labors
and rest of God.

2. Answer and Reply. In the Answer to this Quere, after you have uttered a
sort of frothy words, you come to lay down an impudent lie, saying, private
Saints had never particular and peculiar commands; and ere you leave the Quere,
you contradict your lie your selves; saying, Noah had a particular command to
build an Ark, and John to Baptize, and the Apostles to Preach, etc. But for
Answer to the Quere, which asks how people may know which of these commands
they must follow, you send us to Reverend Pens to seek, but names not where,
and so steals away from it.

Que^. 3. Seeing Christ preached the Kingdom of God within unbeleevers, and the
Apostle says, that which may be known of God, is manifest in them; and that
they came to the knowledge of God and his glory, by the light that shone in
their heart, which God showed them, etc. Deal plainly and let people know how
it now comes to be without, and denied within, as it is by you. Prove your
practice and judgment herein by plain Scripture.

3. Answer and Reply. In this Answer you charge me with two lies; first
concerning Christ preaching the Kingdom of God within unbelievers, and to prove
that a lie, you change that Scripture, Luke 17* 21. which says the Kingdom of
God is within you, to among you. The second lie you charge me with, is, because
I said the Apostle said, that they came to the knowledge of God and his Glory
by that light that shone in their hearts. To which I say its no lie, for none
ever came to the knowledge of God, otherwise but by that spiritual light, and
that the Apostle said so, 2 Cor. 4. 6. may testify, and that Scripture Romans 1.
19. which says, that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God
has showed it to them: this you say cannot be the spirit of God or Christ,
thus being stark blind you utter your lies and confusions without sahme, and
would cast them upon others? but how should you believe the Kingdom of God
within, who say faith and knowledge is not within.

Quer. 4. Whether that new birth spoken of in the Scriptures, be Christ within,
or some other thing? and if not he, then what is it? and how people may know it
by the letter without the light, when they have Christ, and when they have a
spirit of delusion? and whether the light of the spirit alone, be sufficient
without the letter, to reveal the Son of God, the Father, and all Truth, and
judge of all spirits what soever without any addition to it?

4. Answer and Reply. In this Answer you run a wild chase, telling of Adam and
Eden, and much the like things, which you know naught of; and then you tell of
the matter whereof the New Man is made, and you say the Mind and Will of Man is
the Matter, to which I say, that is like all the New Man you know; so the second
Adam is made of the Mind and Will of the first; The Saints had Christ formed in
them, which was their new birth, but is he formed of the Will of Man? the new
birth of the Saints is not of the Will of Man, nor of the Will of the Flesh,
but of God; but your birth is of the Will of Man, and such like babbling stuff
not worth mentioning after you, but leaves the Quere unanswered, only adds a
lie in the conclusion, that our spirit opposes the commands in the Letter.

Quer. 5. Whether the least measure of saving faith in Christ Jesus be not
present power above the Devil, and all the powers of darkness? which if it be,
then what is the cause that men must be captivated to commit sin while they
live? Whether it is want of faith, or that there is not power in faith to
overcome the evil one? or has any faith in Christ, farther then they have
power over sin and the world? or is there any rest to a believer short of that
power?

5. Answer and Reply. In your Answer to this Quere, your whole work is to plead
for sin, and that the greatest fullness cannot except from actual sin, and in
the conclusion you render it as a dangerous thing, lest they should fight
against Gods Counsel and Determination, as though God had determined actual
sin, yet dare not deny the Quere, but say the least measure of faith in Christ
is sufficient to keep from the dominion of sin, as though sin had not dominion
where it is acted, and such like confused stuff you utter, lest any should
believe freedom from sin, and you lose your Kingdom.

Quer. 6. Seeing you say the Scriptures is the ground of faith, and that they
who can read the Scriptures have power to believe, as you did the last first
day; then I say, can any believe who have not read or heard the Scriptures? if
yea, then is not their faith without ground (by your opinion) or is there more
grounds of faith then one? or is the Scriptures Christ?

6. Answer and Reply. In stead of answering this, you call me a liar for
telling you the truth, the time, and place, where and when you did affirm, that
whereof I told you in my Quere, and hundreds may witness it, for which I then
withstood thee and thy companions, among whom it was spoken.

Quer. 7. Seeing you affirm that none can be Ministers of Christ but who are
called of Man, and are learned men; whether was the Apostle Paul a true
Minister, who says, he was neither of man, nor by man; and what he preached
was not after man: Nor was it but by revelation, Gal. 1. 2, 11, 12. Or was
Peter, John, and the rest true Ministers, who were unlearned and ignorant men,
Act. 4. 13. and what lets that God may not choose such now?

6. Answer and Reply. This is answered like the former, by denying what thou
and thy companions did affirm at the Mouth, before many witnesses, and if thou
said some, and another other some, and all was as one, was it not affirmed by
you, but its no new thing to say in words what you will deny when you should
prove in writing; but being called liar by thee is little matter, so many
knowing I speak truth. Farther thou say, I oppose Christ's commands, and belly
his Institutions in general, which are but two lies more to the number. Another
lie you tell of God, saying you dare boldly assert that God never did, nor
never will use any extraordinary means to destroy the ordinary. I say, was
not the brazen Serpent outward Circumcision, and Carnal Ordinances ordinary
means? and did he not by the extraordinary means of his spirit destroy these?
and if it thus befall that which he had commanded, when they committed Idolatry
therewith, then what shall become of your Idol-worship, such as he never
commanded, now at his spiritual appearing? though the Heathen had bespoiled of
their Idols, yet down you must, and the event will declare it.

Quer. 8. What eye is that which the God of this world has blinded? how he
has blinded it, and how it is opened? and by what? and whether the Letter can
open it, yea or no?

8. Answer and Reply. This you excuse, saying, you have not read any such
thing, I say its a hard lesson for the blind to read, but that eye was Christ
and his Ministers sent to open, of which you are blind and cannot read.

Quer. 9. Whether the true Ministry of Christ be the same now for matter,
means and maintenance, that it was in Apostles time? or when was it changed
into great Livings, Tithes and set Maintenance, and by whom, and in what must
it now differ from these?

9. Answer and Reply. In this you have excluded all the Parish Ministry in
the Nation, in that you say, the Ministry of Christ is the same now for
matter, means and maintenance, that it was in the Apostles times, which not one
Steeple house-Teacher in the Nation is in, so all you can plead for them, will
not game what you have confessed against them, till they change their practice.
You have now left no place for any meaning, but to the Apostles practice you
must come, or else none of Christ's Ministers, by your own confession; and then
you would plead for another practice then the Apostles, and says the Apostles
emploiment requires haste, and they were to travel from one Region to another;
were to plant, not to order the Vineyard. To which I say, it will be long ere
your Ministers be in such haste as to leave their parsonages, and go travel
from one Region to another, unless for a better benefit; so by your confession,
they who are not the same, are none of Christ's Ministers; so stop your mouth
for pleading any change from what was in the Apostles time; but what you say
that they were not to order the vinyard; I say, that is false, they both planted
and ordered, but such as sit at home do neither, as they did, so their plants
brings forth like fruit.

Quer. 10. Whether the light of Christ be as sufficient to lead to God now, as
it was in Abraham's time? and if not, what must now be added to it to make it
sufficient?

10. Answer and Reply. In stead of one Answer to this I receive two slanders,
that I seek to prevent his will, and fight against the spirit of God in the
Primitive Saints. Another lie you tell of God, saying, God then wrought
immediately, but he does not the same now. To which I say, the Heathen knew him
not to work then immediately; nor do they now, and so it is denied by you, as
it was by them.

Quer. 11. Can any preach Christ, who have not Christ in them? and where he is,
is he not sole Teacher, what to preach and pray, and how, and when, and to
whom? and is he to be limited by any external thing, or to any external thing?
or is any Ordinance to be practiced, but what he in spirit leads the Creature
to?

11. Answer and Reply. Your judgment is, that they may preach Christ, and yet
not have Christ in them, and so Reprobate Preachers you would set up, and it is
your likest way, lest you should exclude your selves, and all the rest of that
blind generation; but do such know what they preach who preach without Christ
in them? for say you, the Traitor preached Christ as well as any other of the
Apostles; I say such preachers are you of, and such is your fruits, and you
murmur at staying for the spirit, and says, it bereaves you of your glorious
communion of God. I say what communion is that which is without the spirit?
what glory that is I know, its but the glory of your imaginations, and so is
your prayers that is without the spirit, and all the rest of your worships.

Quer. 12. What is the ground and rise of your knowledge? whether it be
received within man from God, or without from the letter? And if without,
whether this be not the knowledge which all the vain janglers comes out of, and
the generation of persecutors comes out of, as the Jews was in, which professed
the letter, and were strangers to the life of God? And whether this generation
of men, and professors in our age, do not begin to manifest the same as the
persecuting Jews did, yea or nay?

12. Answer and Reply. In your Answer to this, you say, your ground of
knowledge is neither within nor without, and so it seems by your Answers, as
without foundation, not spiritual, because not within, and you belly the Church
of Ephesus, in saying their faith and knowledge too was without, not within.
And for your blessed Candles of the Gospel (as you call them) whom you say)
waste themselves, that you may grow up into perfection, I say they are seen to
be dart lights, and such as waste all about them, but withstand perfection,
casting into prison for their gain and envy, such candles give light to all
your drunkards, swearers, whoremongers, fighters, liars, covetous proud
Idolaters, and all manner of licentious persons, such perfection is brought
forth by such as follow their candles, and so call darkness light, and light
darkness, and their works are like their candles, and you blasphemers set these
in stead of Christ, calling them candles of the Gospel, much like your selves,
who say the Ephesians when they believed, their faith and knowledge was not
within; such dark Lanthorns you are, who have not the light in you, so your
light and faith is without, so blame them not who say you have no faith in you,
and so are unreasonable men, 2 These. 3. 2. and that is seen by your tumults at
the Mouth; And for the fire and faggot you tell on, you are going toward it,
fighting, imprisoning, whipping and bloodshed; The light of your Candles.

Quer. 13. What Scripture have you for your manner of worship, as to read a
Chapter, and to give meanings to it, and call it Expounding? to take a Text of
another man's words, and raise Points, Reasons and Uses, etc. to sprinkle
Infants, to sing David's words in order of your Ballades; to stand praying in
the Synagogues at your set times, before and after your glass? prove your
practice by command from Christ, or practice of Gospel Ministers, else for
shame cease to call it Gospel Worship; since none of Christ's Ministers
worshipped in that manner.

13. Answer and Reply* Your Answer to this is thus much, Christ preached and
his Apostles and you preach, Nehemiah expounded and you expound, and so does
the Pope, may he say, but that either he or you are in that manner of preaching
that Christ and his Apostles was, that I deny, and that you are to prove; for
what is not in the same manner is another worship, for if Moses was so
faithful in his house, that not one tittle must be changed much more Christ, so
that worship which is not the same in manner, though it have got the name of
Worship, yet that I deny to be Christ's worship. But to question this your
manner of Worship, say you, is to clip the wings of God. So he that will not
let men* set up what they will for worship, and hold it unquestionable, clips
Gods wings; so we must believe as the Church believes, says your Predecessor;
but will you call your selves Ministers of Christ, and will not the same
manner* serve you to preach and worship in that his Ministers used, but are
gone out from the same in every particular, and would bring the Apostles words
to justify a practice contrary to theirs* which to question you call clipping
of wings. And whereas you say, this has been as often answered as proposed,
that is false, for never was it answered yet, nor can be till the same manner
of worship be brought forth in every particular. Did the Apostles or Ministers
of Christ sprinkle Infants, turn the Scriptures into rhimes to sing Worship,
and pray in the Idols Temple, br^ng a book, and from a verse rail Points and
Reasons, and Uses, live upon Tithes or set Wages, sue their hears for money!
And all the rest of your Worship is also questioned by the Apostles practice,
to which you are contrary: and do you think words will prove it and answer it?
So did your Fathers the Bishops and the Pope: and them and you we deny, and all
your proof that stands in words, while you uphold another practice. Whereof I
say again, (and yet no lie) that none of Christ's Ministers worshipped so. So
your boast of a curb be to your selves, till you prove your practi^e.

Quer. 14. Are you wiser then the Jews was, or stricter in your profession, or
more able to search the Scriptures, or are you f^^^er in your wisdom and
prudence for that work, any of you who deny the light of Christ? And was not
they ignorant of the voices of the Prophets, though they was read every Sabb^th
day, and ^o fulfilled in condemning him? and are not you in the same work; as
to the word of Christ though you have them every first day, beating in your
Synagogues, and haling before Rulers, and think that you do God the best
service, when you are greatest opposers? and so fulfilling the measure of
wickedness, as they did? and how can you escape their end? Mark 13. 9. Act. 13.
27. Mat. 24. 9. Joh. 16. 2, 3. And are not they who are in envy, in Cains way,
out of Christ? Has God any respect to their Sacrifice, yea or no?

1. Answer and Reply. This you answer with, You care not, and so go on to a
piece of railing, your old practice. And you say, Christ has opened your eyes
with your eye salve of Grace. But what eye? or where is that Grace, seeing you
say faith and knowledge is not within?

So you say you have accomplished an Answer to our Queres, which when viewed,
is no more but a piece of vain babbling, railing and lying, which you would have
us take for an Answer; but the Queres yet stand a witness against you and all
your Generation* and are still unanswered. And if you read them over again, you
may see you have scarcely spoken to any one particular.

Now to the rabble of the confused Queres, take an Answer thus.
Quere. I.

WHether your quaking and trembling be not the effects and tokens of those
curses, 1 Samuel 14. 15. Deuteronomy. 28. 65. Psalm. 69. 23. And whether the Lord has not
given you eyes that you should not se^, etc.?

Answ. For Answer to this Quere, I say, no. But the curses therein belong to
such who deny knowledge and faith within, as you do, So take it back and apply
it at home. Yet trembling and quaking we own, else should we deny the Saints
conditions.

Que. 2. Whether there ought not to be a special distinction made betwixt the
dictates of the Spirit of God, and the spirit of man* etc.

Answ. 2. I say yea* But they who have no faith and knowledge in them, cannot
make it. All that proceeds from such, is the Dictates of their own spirit, if
not worse* and for a pretense use the name of Christ. But who have the^r light,
faith, and knowledge from Christ within* lay nothing on Christ but what i^ his
own.

Quere 3, 4. and Answer. To your third and fourth Quere, which are about the
call to the Ministry, wherein you would thrust in your Presbytery, under the
pretense of ordaining Elders, and choosing Apostles. I say, those whom ever
Christ called into his Ministry, were called by his Spirit out of the world,
out of its glory and worships; which yours are none of, as all your manner of
worship makes it manifest. So shelter not your selves in the world, and the
false worships thereof, with their Scriptures who were called out of the world,
and never worshipped in your manner, call, nor maintenante. And for Timothy's
gift, your hands are poluted, and have not that gift, as is manifest by your
fruits: you are of those who lay on hands to beat in the Synagogues; such never
had the gift of the holy Ghost.

Quere 5. and Answer. For your fifth Quere, which is about the light of Christ
being insufficient. You ^^y if it be sufficient, is not this a leading to
perfection? I say; yea it is, and will lead all to perfection that follow it,
which is the light of life, Joh. 8. 12. Yet is no means needless which God
appoints to direct to that light: neither does their message make the light
insufficient. Yet does not this make way for your blind guides, and your false
worship, whose message is to oppose this light, and prove it insufficient;
though formerly in your Book you say you do not, and so prove your selves liars.

Quer. 6. And if Christ preached the Kingdom of God within unbeleevers, as you
say he did; what then is the difference between the faithful and the faithless,
etc.

Answ. Were you not blind you might see, you have answered the Quere you ask,
to wit, the one believes, the other believes not. And therein does the
difference consist: and the latter of these you are, who cannot believe the
light is sufficient; which is one in all, though some will not believe and
follow it: and so though the Kingdom of God be preached within unbelievers,
Luke 17. ^^ Yet says Christ of such, ye will not come to me that you may have
life. So the Gospel of the Kingdom preached does not profit, not being mixed
with faith, Heb. 4. 2.

Quer. 7. And whether is not your spirit a lying one, which says, the
Scriptures are not the words of God, but of men? etc.

Answ. I do not say the Scriptures are not the words of God, but of men. So the
lying spirit is your own. Yet I say, in the Bible there are words of men, yea
and of the devil also; which God never commanded: and this is truth without
equivocation.

Quer. 8. Whether it be any better then Hypocrisy to prate of, and call for
Scripture, and yet deny the Prerogative of Scripture, etc.

Answ. Prove that I have denied the Prerogative of Scripture; or else thy
Question is no better then a lie. And whereas you say, if the commands are the
words of God, why are not other Scriptures the same. I say, if it be the Bible
you call the Scripture, my answer is, because there be many words declared, of
which God never commanded them that spoke them: yet the Daclaration I own to be
true. And whereas you ask, how it is that some of us say, the word of God
cannot be contained in Ink and Paper. I say, because the word of God fills
Heaven and Earth, and contains all things, but cannot be contrined in any place.

Quer. 9. And since you say that Christ only is the word of God, I Quere
whether he be meet to be a teacher of others? nay has he not need himself to
learn the first principle of Religion, that cannot discern between the temporat
expressive word of God, and the co-essential, and coeternal word with God: for
so is Christ.

Answ. That Christ is the only word is plain in Scripture, Joh. 1. Rev. 19.
13. But what are you, who have more words then you can express by Scripture
language? and whose word is that that is temporal, seeing the word of the Lord
endures for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 25.

Quer. 10. Your tonth Quere, wherein you would deny the sufficiency of the Law
written in the heart, does sufficiently manifest your selves heart-blind who
would deny the new Covenant to be sufficient, Jer, 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. Heb. 8.
8, 9, 10, 11. was the Law written in the heart sufficient in David's time, Psalm.
37. 31. and was it sufficient in the Apostles time, Romans 8. 2. and is it now
become insufficient with you? that therefore you would turn us back again to
the Letter to be made perfect, who have begun in the spirit. But this is
suitable to your knowledge and your faith, which you deny to be within. And
whereas you ask wherefore the Law in the Letter was given? I say, not to give
life, but to drive into the Law in Spirit (of which it was a figure) which Law
of the spirit gives life, Romans 8. 2.

Quer. 11. What be those first principles of the Oracles of God, made mention
of by Paul as needful for believers to know? what the Oracles be? whether the
Scriptures, or what else be the Oracles, or the Principles, how learnt? and
after what manner? and by what means? or if the Scripture be the Oracle of God,
why not the Word of God also? and what difference between the Oracles and the
word? and wherein consistent? and what those principles of the Doctrine of
Christ be? whether the same with those of the Oracles? wherein different? and
wherein congruent, and what the growing up into perfection is? and when the
end? and whether in this life, or in another.

Answ. All this heap of Queres cannot let in the Serpent, neither can he know
the Oracle which is spiritual, and the letter is not it. You must first know
the light of Christ in Spirit (which is the first principle) and faith to
believe in it; the thing which you deny within; for so the Oracle and first
principle is learnt; and that is the manner and means; and the Word and Oracle
of God is not at difference, but in all things consistent; and the light of
Christ which is the first principle leads to them; and so is one with them (not
different) and therein is the growing to perfection, which is not in your life,
whose faith and knowledge is without, but in the life of another.

Quer. 12. What is the Kingdom of God that our Savior speaks of Luke 11. 21.
and what that Kingdom Matthew. 11. how did it suffer violence? by whom? and after
what manner?

Answ. The Kingdom of God is one, whereinto none can enter who have no faith in
them, so read your selves shut out in your Answer to my twelfth Quere. Neither
can any know how the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, but who is come through
John's Ministry, which such as you are far off, who say the light of Christ is
not sufficient, that lights every one that comes into the world, which John
calls the true light, and bare witness to, that through him all might believe.
Which you whose faith is without, resist. So out of the Kingdom you are shut
with the Pharisees, though it be preached in you.

Quere. 13. What is that Election? what that Ordination? what that Adoption?
and What that Drawing so often times spoken of in Scripture? and who they be
who are capable of it here? and after what manner administered? and make out
your judgment herein plain Scripture.

Answ. That Election, Ordination and Adoption is Christ, and the Drawing is the
Spirit of the Father which is administered in the light, which draws to Christ
the Election which none are capable of, who deny the light to be sufficient,
and have no faith in them. And this judgment is according to the Scriptures.

Quer. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Your 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, Queres are concerning your
worship, and you begin with a lie. Saying* you have proved Scriptures may be
expounded, which is yet to prove: neither can you prove it, as you use it, by
the practice of any Gospel-Minister. And under this lie would you Usher in and
Shelter your Doctrines, Reasons, Uses, stinted times, Tyths and Masterships*
Pulpit-Worship, and literal Text preaching, sprinkling of Infants, and
Sacraments as you call them, which is every particular* as you perform them, a
thing besides the Saints practice: Neither will the Scripture own you therein
without wresting. So that is a lie, which says the Scriptures allows it. For
the Scripture allows no man to change any title of the manner of Gospelworship,
much less them which have changed all. Neither does it allow any sort of people
to set up a worship, and then wrest the Scriptures to uphold it. For then
should we allow the Pope as well as all the Rabble of false Worshippers that
are descended from him. And whereas you ask, are not these the Ministers which
Rome would destroy, which we cry down? and were not the Martyrs of the same
profession? or wherein did they differ, etc. I say, those Ministers which we
cry down are such who had their rise from Rome, however their Mother and they
are fallen out, whose Kingdom stands most in contentions; neither do we cry down
(...) who are come out from that Romish Worship, and herein do those whom we
cry down, and the Martyrs differ; in that the one were sufferers for conscience
sake, according to the measure of the light then made manifest; and the other
are persecuters of the heir now at his coming: and opposers of his light in
conscience, whereby the Martyrs were led to suffer, who suffered not for
standing for Pulpits, and Masterships, and Tyths, but for bearing witness
against other of that trash, both of the some rise and nature. And such do
justify their murders, who are found persecuting for the rest of the relics
that are yet behind; and so be witnesses against your selves, that you are
their Children who slew the Martyrs.

Quer. 19. And since you say I am damned, etc.

Answ. The foundation of this Quere is a lie, and of the same it is builded.
And what thou asks concerning the ground of Faith; I say, it is Christ in the
degrees of the several measures thereof; and in the light they are known within
the creature; the effects whereof is truth, peace, and righteousness. But the
liars who have no faith in them bring forth other effects, as is seen in your
book.

Quer. 20. Whether the power that works in you, and in the rest of your
quaking Fraternity be Divine, or Diabollical? If Divine, prove it by Scripture.
Or may we not know the tree Antichrist, by its fruits, Heresy in you* If
Diabollical, then cease like Simon Magus, to seem to be some great one to draw
Disciples after you, and resist this spirit in your self; better repent then
perish.

Ans. The power that works in us is Divine* Isa. 26. 12. Phil. 2. 13. and the
tree is known by its fruits: and that is Antichrist, and Heresy, and
Diabolical, who has no faith nor knowledge in them. And such like Simon Magus
would by or sell it for money, if they had it. And these are Antichrists which
John speaks on, who cannot confess Christ in them. And such we resist by the
Spirit in us.

Quer. 21. Whether it be by the spirit of Satan or the power of God, say you,
that works by Charms? whereby some of your Proselytes have been possessed
with Devils, as Gilpin, Mary White, and others. And whether Peter or Simon
Magus be the Apostles of Christ? or whether it be the work of the spirit of God
to inspire with the holy Ghost or with Satan? and hereby let us know whether
you be Saints or Sorcerers. Make it out upon a Gospel account.

Ans. The liars and those that have no faith in them, are possessed already:
but when the light of Christ is preached, the Devil that has possessed them
comes therewith to be judged; who then sets up his Charms to tempt them, and
turn them back again into his old way, which if he effect it, then his
Ministers cries them up for converted Christians, as they did Gilpin, till they
were ashamed on him for his Drunkenness. So they become your Proselytes, for
after the Devil get up with his Charms in them they abide not with us. For the
spirit of God judges all Charms and charming Worships, and inspires with the
holy Ghost. But they who have no faith in them are inspired by Satan* Hereby we
know Saints from Sorcerers.

Quer. 22. And since you so much rail against Superiors and Dignities, etc.

Ans. Where the Quere is begun with a lie; the intent thereof is easily seen.
What is the Superiors and Dignities we have railed against, the latter part of
your Quere makes it manifest. Because we will not call your Ministers Masters;
as well as Rulers. I say, they are blind that take them for either. But since
this is the thing you mean. Is not Christ a Railer also with you, who forbade
the same before us? if the Follower be guilty, surely the Leader cannot be
free. And whereas you ask, if Stewards of the Mysteries of God be inferior to
the Word Master. I say, he may well be said to have no faith or knowledge in
him, that calls them either: for there was never any of the Ministers of Christ
who were Stewards of his Mysteries, that were called of men Masters. Neither
will all your pleading for it, obtain it from any who know the one Master.

Quer. 23. Did not your spirit speak in Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their
adherents, etc.

Ans. I say no; Our spirit was opposed there, as it is now by you. And the
spirit of Diatrophes, you tell on, is that which loved the preheminenee; and is
now pleading for Mastership, which we oppose with its Doctrine; by which the
holy Men of God ever suffered, and now suffers even unto blood for the
testimony thereof, even for the Lord Christ within us: which you render as a
reproach, so to say, which we count great riches, and the hope of glory, which
you who deny faith and knowledge within oppose, in a spirit of presumption and
abomination.

Quer. 24. Is a lie the fruit of an in falliable, or falliable spirit? and may
not a true Church err, and so be falliable. Or may it err, and yet still be
infallible? or is pretense of infallibility or assurance, that that Church so
pretending is a true Church; or did any of the Apostles boast of infallibility,
etc.

Ans. A lie is the fruit of a fallible spirit. Therefore is there so many heapt
up in your Book; who deny the infallible spirit and faith within. For he that
has not an infallible spirit has a lying spirit, as you have sufficiently
manifested. And the true Church is in God the Father, and in Christ Jesus his
Son which is infallible. But neither the Church of Rome nor yours is it; who
are without God in the world* who scoff at the Lord Christ within us: and
render it as the sin of Korah for us to confess him. How should there be ought
else in you but a lying spirit? And the Apostles boasted of an infallible
spirit, from which nothing could separate them, with which they were sealed to
the day of Redemption after they believed in the light, which you that deny
faith within have little knowledge of; and so oppose you know not what; and
therefore are looking for miracles for your adulterous spirit; and says, is
not the spirit fallible? I say, stop your mouths, you lying spirits. The spirit
of God is not fallible: nor did you ever know it, who would so render it, which
spirit, you that have not, you speak of your selves, and judge with a lie; and
the pure light you know not, but are in the hellish darkness you tell of. As
these errors following which are gathered out of the heap of your confusion,
may witness,

That the new birth is a Remission of sin.

That the new birth is nothing else but a sanctified mind and will.

That the mind and will of man, is the matter whereof the new Creature or Image
of God is made.

That the new birth is the work of the spirit, the ministry of man as the
matter.

That he that knows the new birth by the letter of Scripture, knows it not
without the light, and yet says, closing with the law written in the heart is
contrary to the Gospel, and that the Gospel is not made known by seeing within.

That their sins was no sins before the* Letter of the Law was given.

That the Saints before the Letter was given had immediate Revelations of Gods
will, but since (as Israel did in Canaan so) lie at Rack and M^nger.

That if the Law which God has written in the heart be now sufficient,
then God wrought a work in vain, in giving the Law at mount Sinai.

That the Gospel is not made known by seeing within.

That the faith and knowledge of the Disciples of Ephesus was not within.

That private Saints had never particular, and peculiar commands.

That the Apostles was to plant, but not to keep in order the Vineyards.

That as Satan is a Serpent so is Christ.

That closing with the Law written in the heart is contrary to the Gospel.

That the Law written in man's heart were not sufficient to its proper end.

Many more such blind confusions I might have gathered out of the heap, but
these may serve to show what you know of the new Birth, The new Covenant, or
Christ whom it is, The Apostles Ministry, or the Saints commands, The Gospel
light, The knowledge of sin, or your selves, but in you blind busy minds
will be babbling you know not, as the least Child of light shall judge yon.

And seeing you are telling of Paradise, of the fall of man* and the Law
written in his heart, and many such things your curious mind runs into, give an
Answer in plainness to these Queries, so shall we make farther public proof
of what you have learned, and of whom, whether of Christ or of the Serpent,
which you call Christ.
1. WHither, and from what did man fall, seeing God spoke to him in the Garden
after his fa^? And whether the Resurrection must be to that from whence he fell
or no?

2. What death that was Adam died* that day he eat the forbidden; seeing Adam
lived many hundred years after?

3. What was the ground of Adams obedience before the fall, and what is the
ground of man's obedience in Christ? and wherein do they differ, and in what
particulars?

4. Is it possible that any Believer can bring forth the same fruits in Christ
that was in man before the fall? or fruits better, or fruits not so good, or in
what particular shall they differ, as to the ground and rise thereof; And also
as to the acceptance with God?

5. What the seed of the Serpent is, and what the seed of the Woman is, and
whether they be within people or no? and whether they can both rule in one
person at once? and whether the seed of the Woman must not be where the Serpent
is when he br^^es his head? and what is it that can let every particular man
see this done if he mind it?

6. Whether that law of the new Covenant spoken on Heb. 8. which is by the Lord
written in the heart, be the same in every particular with that which you say
was writ in Adams heart before the fall, or wherein does it differ, and how may
the difference be known?

7. Where is that City the Saints were fellow Citizens of, what it is, and how
may one know when they are in it, and whether any that commits sin is in that
City, yea or no?

8. What is that beast that rose up out of the Sea, and what that beast that
came up out of the Earth, wherein do they differ? how may they be known, that
men may not worship neither of them?

9. What is that which is dead in trespasses and sins in an unbeliever, and
whether the reading of the Letter can quicken it? or can any understand the
Letter while they are so dead?

10, What that mystery of faith is that is held in a pure Conscience? since you
say the faith and knowledge of the Disciples was not within? and whether that
faith and knowledge that is from without, not within, can save and bring to
know God?

11. What faith and knowledge that is, which you say is without a man, and how
may any know when they have it?

12. How must the Gospel be made known to the soul? seeing you say it is not
made known by seeing within?

13. The Word of God at the first being the Matter whereon the Image of God was
made in man, how comes it now to be changed, seeing you now say the mind and
will of man is the Matter, and then the M^nistry of man as the Matter; and is
not this blasphemous confusion?

14. Seeing you (...) Letter of the Law was given, nor was they imputed* what
was the cause of the Old World drowning, and Sodom and Gomorrahs burning with
fire, and whether was not their sins imputed to them?

15. What the soul of man is, and how a creature may know when it is in death,
and when it is raised to life eternal?

16. What that grace of God is that brings salvation, and has appeared to all
men? and how it has appeared to all men, and how it brings salvation.

17. What that inward man is that is renewed daily, though the outward man
perish, seeing you say the new birth is nothing else but a sanctified mind, and
whether the new birth be a substance, yea or no?

18. Whether such as have changed their manner of worship, from that manner
which the Saints worshipped in, and then wrest the Scriptures to uphold it, be
true worshippers, or can be truly said to take the Scriptures for their rule.

19. Whether ever any Minister of Christ did go into the Idols Temple to pray
and worship in that manner you do, in any one particular, or did they sue
people for Tithes or Money, for so doing? did they or their Hearers bear in
their Synagogues, or hale before Rulers such as opposed them? or did they ever
make use of an outward Law to inflict upon any man's person, or to spoil their
goods, or was they who did so any Christians?

20. What is the Cross of Christ, and how does the Creature take it up, and how
is it* preached, and what is the offense of it, and how is it the power of God
to salvation, and how does it become a stumbling block, and how does the
offense of it cease?

21. How is Christ the light of the world, and how is it he lights every man
that comes into the world? (...) and how are all things that are made manifest
upon us by the light, and what is the cause that so many remain in darkness?

22. What that tongue of the Egyptian Sea is, and how must it be smitten in the
seven streams, that men may go over dryshoed?

23. Whether the new birth be not Christ formed in the Creature, and whether
that be not a substance; and are not you utterly blind, who says its nothing
else but a sanctified mind, and the will of man, and his Ministry is the matter
of it.

Answer plainly, and do not send a deal of railing, and mis-calling, and
bitterness, lying and false accusing, in stead of Answers, as you have hitherto
done: Also view my former Queries over again, and your pretenses, and for shame
never call those for Answers, which scarcely answer to the true end of any one
particular.

FINIS.

