MUTINY MAINTAINED: OR, SEDITION Made good from Its Unity, Knowledge, Wit,
Government.


BEING A DISCOURSE, directed to the ARMIES INFORMATION.

To the Ingenuous Soldiery.
Masters,
YOU are now in your Winter Quarters; I have therefore sent you this Pamphlet
to warm you. Not that I intend to play at Blow-coals with you, you know that
sport too well. Only, finding your Genius given to new Doctrines (many of you
being Seekers) I thought a Paradox might not not be unwelcome, one allows
killing, another lying; such Treatises every foot come to your hands; sure then
you will accept of this Piece; that smells much of your Match and Gunpowder,
and concerns more your Strength, and your Trade. I have no Stratagem to take
you, but reason; and if you examine the Discourse to the pith, not
superficially, I doubt not but you will submit to him, that

wishes you as he does himself. N. N.

THey that have seen the Dancing Horse, how exactly he knows his Figures, and
keeps Time to the Music, as if a French Dancing Master had taught him. How he
counts money, as if he had been a Cash keeper. How he scrapes, and makes legs,
and kneels for the King, as if he begd his enjoyment, but for the State
presently lies down and groans: they all admire, and cry, This Horse shows
tricks that youl'd believe the Beast were Rational; which means no mor then
this, That he truly has not Reason, but resembles only him that has. So
Tacitus writes of the Legions in Germany mutining, That they would now be all
on fire, and anon be all as quiet, with so great equality and constancy that
youl'd believe they were well Governed, which is as much to say, That they
seemed governed, but in truth were not.

Now I will endeavor to make it clear against the Historian, That Sedition, or
let it be the Seditious multitude, is governed perfectly by its own Nature,
much more then any obedient Army can be: Which I thus argue;

Tacitus speaks, I will confine my self only to the Military. This then as much
as the name teaches, is nothing else, then a Separation of one part of the Army
from the rest of the Body on purpose to obtain by force something from the the
Commander. Now, if it is said of an obedient Army (and it is well said) That it is
Governed, when upon the Word given, being put in order, it presently joins
Battle with the Enemy: Much more ought we to say it (if we compare one with the
other) of the Seditious. Let Us come to the proof upon trace of some Maxims.

The efficient cause of an Army may be entitled the General, for as Order is
the soul or form of that Army, such Order comes produced from no other then the
General, who like an Idaea contains it. A Seditious Body too has a Commander
that will excellently govern it, because it will yield most easily to be
governed, being all of one mind like him they have chosen; and much more,
because their own good is the very same with the good of the Commander: A thing
not ordinary betwixt the Army and the General. See Alexander conducting his
Macedons through unknown, untamed and unpenetrable Countries; think you an
equal profit accru'd to his Phalanges or Squadrons, as did to him? Surely no:
He counted all their sufferings Little, because by them he became Great: his
small Body valued it not, so he might obtain the great World. For all their
hungers and thirsts the unhospitable Rocks found his Tent furnished with
exquisite Meats, and generous Wine to crown his goblets: whose bottoms being
carved with the like Effigies of those conquered Kings he took in his
Victories, he delighted still to drink them empty, more to tickle his Ambition
then to quench his Thirst. No, it was not so with his Soldiers; they Dyed to
Immortalize him, and sowed the Plains with their own Limbs, that he might reap
the Palms thence budding. One only was in Purple, for which a thousand wounded;
one only Triumphing, for which a Thousand Conquering. To Win only for him, they
Lost not only their own, but themselves.

Hence from not being the same, the good of the Commander and the Soldiers, it
arises, That though the final cause of him and them Unitely taken, may be
called the very same, that is, the Victory; yet for all that, both the one and
the others taken by themselves, are drawn by ends too much differing one from
another; whence after is derived that discordance of Causes, which is contrary
(as I said before) to the regulating of a thing which ought to be governed.

I should lose the day in wearying the Army, if I would go to show by examples
how differing the motives of Soldiers are in fighting: not with the Commander
only, but compared even amongst themselves: Some brandish the Sword, not to win
glory, but to gain gold. Others with an immoderate force weakens all the
interprize; and to make himself the only one among them, comes to divide them.
Others, only make stand, and face the enemy, because he is too strong behind
their back, or because they cannor fly, try to put him to slight. This man
seeks not renown with his sword upon the Foe, but his revenge upon a particular
Enemy. Some destine their lust to another wife, and for the plunder of a
tender maid, value not the loss of the whole Baggage. Avarize, Zeal, Disdain,
Fear, Ambition, Lust, Rage and Rashness, make a hundred factions of one Army.
Else why do we read of Pompey for to animate his men, to run up and down, now
comforting these with promises, then pricking them with reproof; now stirring
up their hopes, then provoking their vigilance with the danger; sometimes
enflaming their covetousness, with showing the great booty in the adverss Camp;
then awaking their compassion, by telling of the misery of their Country. Sure
all this because he knew there must needs be diverse arguments to persuade the
same action to many, that have diverse ends in the working it.

Now in a Mutiny the parts are all alike, as in a train of gunpowder, if in a
moment but one spark fall upon one corn, it sets fire on all, and runs to the
very end, for no other cause, but that they are all alike. So the first will
that flashes or gives fire in a Sedition, becomes at once the will to a
thousand breasts. Such is the consanguinity and kindred of Minds! And certainly
it must be so upon good reason, since the fear of the same Punishment, and the
hopes of the same reward binds them in an undissolvable Tie. They will the same
thing, because there lives but one heart in many breasts.

Knowledge of that Enemy? Surely yes. Now by whom is he best known, by an Army
in the day of Battle, or by this Seditious body in the Quarrel? The Army often
fights against people of contrary Climates and Customs, and knows not whether
their Flights be for Fear or for Stratagem; whether their Charges be out of
Election or Necessity; or their preparations be in reality or appearance.
Again, though the conditions and natures of the Soldier were clearly known,
yet on the other side how often does the way and nature of the Commander happen
to be obscure, who, if he deserves that name, ought to order it so, that to his
own shirt even his own thoughts must be concealed? It will happen then almost
impossible for that Army to be well governed, when neither it, nor he that
governs it, has any knowledge of the enemies, or of their Captain.

On the other side, the enemy of a mutinuous body is as it were always the
very same, which before the sedition was its Commander, that is to say, it is
that, of whom by often and often repeated proofs they know where are the
strengths, where the defects; on what side they are most exposed, or most
impenetrable upon assaults of others, whether there be matter of surprise, or
of force. So for the Commander they mutiny against; they know his courage by
many trials in charges, his suffering in sieges, his fortune in fights, and his
discipline in his rigidness. Certainly, these that were well governed by him,
are best of all taught to govern themselves against him: Especially, since
mutinies happen for the most on that part of the Army, which the Commander
knows best of all the rest, that is to say, that part which is compounded of
old Soldiers, because they among all the rest are highly strong and ingenious,
and well knowing to themselves of their abilities to pretend to great things,
and to complain with much justice, not obtaining conditions, which is no less
necessary in moving seditions, then useful to be known in afterward governing
them, as it is fit.

Tacitus, who tells, that Germanicus whilst he made the Pile and Conquest of
France, hearing of the seditious rising in his Armies in Germany, swiftly in
all have marches th^ther to quiet them. At this sudden flash of his imperial
look (which serenely lightning made them to love him whilst he terrified them)
the seditious troops with humbled and relenting brows gave great signals of
their repentance; nevertheless, so soon as he was enterd the Tents, they set up
a cry, and snatching by force his right hand, under a show of kissing it, those
decrepit Soldiers wrought so, that he must feel their empty and dissurnisht
jaws with his own fingers. Cicero here with all his flame colors to figure
out the motion of the affections so stirred up, cannot speak so much, nor so
lively, as was said by these pale and trembling lips in this their silence, who
not being able to bite the hands, they embowelled themselves into the marrow
and midst of their Generals heart. And thus was heard the dumb to speak.

When never shall it be granted, O good Germanicus, to repose, till our
sepulcral ages obtain us our repose? Our jaws make witness what advances we are
like to draw from so many Wars, and shall it not be permitted us, after we have
lost our bones, to lay up in safety the miserable relics of our body? What
necessity so hard forces wretched mortals to live amongst deaths, even until
death? See now our stooping shoulders can bear no longer our weighty arms. See
our dry hands, that infect our pikes with their palsy, can do no more then
join themselves in putting up supplicant desires to thy mercy and compassion.
Thus to be obstinate to command heavy shadows, rather living bodies under thy
banners, is nothing else but an ingenious ambition not to make bloody fights,
no, though we miserably should be cut all in pieces. Ah, grant us the dominion
of our life, at least, in a season when we are to lose it; secure that to us,
when it can no longer secure thee. Is there no other death, but the Sword,
possibly under the Romans? Thy Army will not be enervated, though it be not
accompanied with our falling age, which tires it self in following it. The body
will be the stronger, if the withered Members be cut off for unprofitable. This
our desire is the effect of a most happy Fortune, thy Partisan: She will not be
exposed to the long carreer of thy noble toils and enterprises, which she
foresees, unless first in the place of thy worn Soldiers, you sublitute and
enroll fresh, young, and lusty.

Now lets believe, if Wit knows to arm so strongly the disarmed mouths of the
seditious with a silent eloquence, for to gain the good will of their Captain;
it will also know how to govern the right hand when there shall be an occasion
to arm it for to arise fear in the Captain.

To these mild and aged Mutineers, their General was their Glory, and their
delight: But, had he been one hated by the seditious, or did they begin to
loath and grow weary of the State that imploye; them (a State suppose declining
too, which snatches and catches at all things as dying men do; or as those do
that are about such; or be ^t a State in swaddling clothes, whose tender roots
facilitates its removal) how fierce and bold would these have then been? You
would quickly have seen their daring forehead backed with a wellhung tongue, and
their audacities seconded by this language, not making their Addresses to the
Commander, but encouraging one another: Thus,

We, whose victorious Swords used often to give life to others, lets now give
breath to our selves. Once such was our love to the Cause, and liking to the
Commander, that 'twas our weariness to be at rest, and yet we reposed in
wearying our selves; 'twas our love to be upon duty, and we were in pain and
labor, if that we labored not; we have been hitherto amorously seditious to
have ^ad every one the first place in dangers, and the last in repose, thus
quarreling, to show that love has its civil Wars no less then hatred. But now
the case is altered, and what thanks have we for all our labors? we have been
cajoled, trapand, cheated, molded, outed, displaced; fallacies and lies are
looked upon as glorious arts, these are the State Stratagens, only they deserve
not that name becaused used so often; we fight under Colors indeed, it is not
substance; all promise, no performance: Where are our Arrears? must we that
spend our lives for others rights be the first must be without our dues, and
for our Conquests be made slaves in this to serve without pay? upon all designs
how often have they promised us all that was behind, and must word be broke
with us, who in honor ever keep it with an enemy? must they advance themselves
by keeping us low? Our Master Mountebanks makes no more of us then Zannies, we
are cut and run through, while they vent their cheating Balsomes, and thus heal
and salve their own poverties, pretending to cure the grievances of the People.
But our Arreers! Fellow Soldiers! Money is our life; we may well keep a life
for that, for which there is I one but ventures to loose it. Money! it is that that
gives us strength in the day of Battle; this Balsomes our ghastly wounds, and
stocks our exhaushed Veins with a better recruit then our own blood. It Is but
honest then, and just for us tomutiny for that which makes all the World almost
knaves; who shall call this sedition? it is but a nobler way of petitioning for
right, which our Grandees and Republicans have as often countenanced, as their
designs had occasions, it is they have taught us this abominable way of cure, to
owe health to a disease, and recovery to witcheraft. Come, the Camp's our
common Pleas, and the Sword our Advocate; once Courts were held under Oaks,
and we may as well keep them in the Field. Nor, need we fear, where the most
are, all will be; in Lamps, the Oil still runs to that place that is burnt, and
spirits to the part aggrieved. Come, if we cannot over come, we cannot be
overcome.

But indeed a discontended Army can never want matter whereby to vent its
passion, especially when they have a resolution to disband, and find their
rewards not answerable to their service. Balaams dull Ass in his own defense
became a Demostheres. Had then a seditious body but a trooping Jesuit for
their mouth, that Spirit Legion, that enters into pay, with purpose to play the
Devil in a State, how would his eloquence like Gunpowder set all on fire? how
would his Rhetoric discover the unfortunateness of Soldiers, and the
ungratefulness of those that employ them; who cannot be thankful enough, does
usually become unthankful; which is no better then a moral rebel. Besides, the
Soldier they cannot love, because they fear him; for he that has a Power to
give, shows therein also a power to take away, which savours somewhat of that
frightful word Superiority. But one may read a Soldiers destiny in the
Heavens; wherein are Bears, Dog, Scorpion, Hydea, Goat (nay Calistus and
Ariadne, who were not so honest as they should be) and below their feet is
valiant Achilles placed, and other Demigods. Sad fate, to see Beasts and
Monsters above Men, and they that have ventured highest to be lowest set by.
See the great Hannibal at last by a factious Senate thrown into exile. Scipio
too, fon being too much regarded, became to be ill looked upon: He who had
conquered Africa the mother of Monsters, at his return found greater Monsters
in Rome, accusers that condemned him as guilty; of what? of that only which
makes Envy repining; and thus the great Commander banishes himself, changing
his Sword into a Spade, his Horse into Oxen, his Trenches into Furrows, his
Victories into Harvests; from a Soldier he turns Husbandman: No heading an
Army now like to the Plough-tail. This advantage has a great Mind above a
great Heart.

Ungrateful State! the very Tanker-bearers have their seasons when they bedeck
their Conduits with Garlands and Boughs, in thanks of the Water they draw from
them. The Ocean too renders the received waters of the Rivers unto the Earth in
mists and Showers; and Kings by their Nobles return to the People all that they
sucked from them: But Common-wealths-men, like those two Monsters Soylla and
Chanybdis, the one breaks the ship and scatters the lading, and the other
swallows all up. Or perhaps this is learnt from the greasy Dutch, who in his
frolicks first drinks the Glass and breaks it. Thus they of old adored the
Images of the Gods, and cared not for the Artificers that made them; those
Stones were honored as Divine, and their Makers were trod upon as Stones. Or
if it chance that the Interess^ does do honor the Soldier, it is but as the
Heathen did their Goddess Fever, that he may not be their Enemy. Alas! the
Soldiers interest is the least concerned, and the least looked after, who are
only made use of as stirrops to advance the ambitious, and then they are
thrown aside, or transported abroad like old Iron. They seek to him only for
themselves; for their own profit, not his good; just as we search for Physical
Herbs, not to make much of them, (though much be made of them,) but only to
chop and bruise and squeeze them, and all the good juice and virtue being drawn
out, as Corisca speaks in Pastor fido, -- they are straight to the Dunghill
thrown, So when they have done with us, with us they have done.

Great Men's palates run after new dishes, being soon cloyed with the first. So
the affections, which are the palate of the Soul, in our Governors quickly
loath and nauseate even that which fostered, nourished, and gave breast to their
Greatness. Nay, it is well if it stops here, since Nero scrupled not the murder
of his Mother, that sought all ways to raise him. We know too, that nursing
Fathers have had the like Fate, and some may fear that our mother Country will
hardly escape their Anatomy.

Thus you may see now a tongue can sound to Arms, and with its Oil put an edge
to the Sword, and make it look young again; so that a Commander dreads more the
witty Soldier, then the strong one.

But some one rising against this, will say, That Sedition is reckoned among
the evil and wicked things, which scarce appears how they conveniently should
know to be governed, especially being one of those, whose nature is no other
then confusion, disturbance, immoderateness, in sum, all that which is directly
opposite to Rule, Government and Order. Now admitted, that Sedition be an evil
thing; I answer, that of many things that are evil, because the end proposed is
evil, yet it cannot for all be said, that they know not how to be rul d and
governed, since they know fit and apposite means for obtaining this end.
Pisistratus was wicked, and Caesar wicked in aspiring to the Tyranny of their
Country; yet in surmounting to the designed Post, none can deny, but that they
knew most excellently how to govern themselves. On the other side, who looks on
Cicero, who endeavoring all ways with the Senate to throw the Generalship of
the Army upon young Augustus, came to make him Monarch by the very same way,
which he believed ought to have made him the renewer of the Republic; he, I
say, may well affirm that he was a good man, but again he will subjoyn, that
the good men are themselves sometimes governed unadvisedly. In like manner, I
grant that Sedition sounds in its title Confusions, Quarrels, Revolutions; what
then, shall not the Seditious know to be governed? This is false: And my Reason
I will tell you, with an Example in my opinion most conducing. Sedition in an
Army, is such a thing, just as a Fever uses to be in a man's body; for both are
compounded of those bad humors, which are working and fermenting to give
assault against Head and Heart: Certainly, who looks upon this poor Ague-man,
sees nothing but discomposures, turbations and confusions, that are past
representing. He flings a thousand ways his legs, his Arms, his hands about his
bed, as if he desired to fly, and to be rid of himself: His head goes to find
his feet, and his feet rise where his head was; the fire makes him desire cold,
and the cold makes him mad to run to the fire; he is weak, and his weakness
forces him to mavelous violences; he rages, he languishes, he threatens, he
knows not what to say, and says more then he knows; he knows not what he sees,
and sees not what is before his eyes; he is himself for his pain, and for
feeling it, he is not himself. Who ever saw such a Babel? And yet these inward
and seditious Humors, which make the Sick-man not to rule himself, do so
wonderfully govern themselves in their assaults, that the Hippocrates and
Galens amazed cannot tell how these material and gross Humors should observe
in their Paroxysmes and fits such exactness of days, and such proportions of
progresses, which would be enough to spring from a rational power, working by
counsel and election. Nay for comfort to the Seditious, some will say, That an
Ague too most an end will have its course, in spite of all Doctors, and their
Jesuits powder; besides, that sometimes it is Physic for a King.

But here I find that Caesar is against me. How (says he) can it be ever true,
that Mutinies (even in their greatest vigor) should be governed with good
rule, since that flying cloud, so proudly towering to see to, will dissolve it
self at the least breath; nay, at the first brow of the Majesty of their
General, they level and lay down their swellings for the most part: And this
their Calm is their Shipwreck. Where was there a more enraged Sedition, then
when I returned out of Spain, which stirred up all my Armies Legions against
me? Then with united and loud voices they required me to recompense with Money
the Blood they had lost, or to grant them liberty to keep that which was
remaining. They were ambitious too, to show, that in War the Head depends more
from the Hands, then the Hands do from the Head. Perhaps my men had not all the
good qualities of an excellent Seditious; yet, they were such old Soldiers,
that their battles numbered all the Provinces of the West, and 'twas their
nature ever rather to fight, then discourse; they would run into dangers with
the same looks that others came out of them; they were so stout, that I could
see my Victories in their eyes, before ever a Sword drawn; they were of so much
knowledge and wit too, that had I been less then I was, you might have seen a
glorious Army of all Commanders. And yet at the settled undaunted undauntedness
only of my look, at the generous fire of my anger, and at the giving them my
scornful leave to disband; as if my eyes had been the nerves of their hands,
and the edge of their swords, as if I had been able to move them with my beck,
they all in spite of their teeth, trembling and mute, ran into the Camp, and
yielded themselves, and with one accord assured me, not only their own hands
to my future enterprises, but for a present punishment offered their own
throats. Thus Bees with animosities enraged, cast but a little dust, they are
straight asswag'd. And shall we now say, that that is well governed, which falls
to ground so easily? that order is good, which in an instant is discomposed?
that those Wills are regularly directed toward their end, which in a moment
change boldness into fear, force into weakness, and haughtiness and fierceness
into pusilanimity?

Though Caesar has spoke as he Fought, Bravely and Galantly; yet I doubt not
for all this fierce re-encounter but to keep the saddle: My reason this; To be
easily changed from one estate into another, is not a sign that that was not
well grounded at the first, which is now changed. It Is a well managed Horse on
which the Cavalier with full carrear runs at the Ring; and yet but one light
trip throws both himself and Ruler over and over. Nay the Facility, after that
the Sedition is spent, and the Soldiers turn to the obedience of their
Commander, proves most strongly, that it is best of all governed whilst it
continues. For the Soldiers then Revolting are put in a violent estate, it
being their Natural to be quiet and complyant under obedience of the Captain.
Now it is very true, That things in a violent estate cannot hold long; yet
therefore it is not true, That they cannot for that time they do hold be much
better governed, then they would ever have been in their natural state. This
arises from that Instinct which is implanted in every thing, to desire
self-conservation: whence the greater the dangers are, the greater guard and
wariness is awakened in him that is in peril; and thereupon the violent State,
arming all its forces against the being of a thing, is the cause that for its
own safety, Head and Hands, Action and Council are laid together to effect all
how it may be best governed. Thus in the Water which is not our Sphere, one
governs his Feet and Arms with a finer rule of motion, when he swims, then when
he passes along in the water. So the fellow that dances on the Ropes, he
balances himself perfectly, that neither eye nor hand, nor any part shall lean
one tittle beyond the Cock or Poise; but after he is come down to the ground,
he forms his steps by chance, and without any examination. And truly neither
the one nor the other can stay in the Air or Water long, so as upon the
ground; yet one by his Swimming may arrive to what he intended to come to, and
the Rope-dancer be a gainer by his perril.

se defendendo; Mutiny sure then may virtuously demand its dues or disbanding.
He that bid the Soldier be content with his pay, did not bid him to be content
without it. Nay, if Conscience were a Military term, suppose that should alter
the mind, and make men see that horrid madness, which plucked the Sun out of its
Sphere, because some men had sore eyes. Where Sophistry and cheat has made us
go out of the way, it is lawful to resume and go back to our first Argument, and
leave off those errors, which others have made us guilty of to conceal their
own faults. The great Physician retracted his errors concerning the sutures of
the head; and is it unjust for us to recant those about the divisions,
divorces, nay separation of the Head. For Truth and Justice every stone may be
stirred: The curing of those that are bitten with Tarantulas, is to play so
many tunes till they find the true one. That miserable disease, called
Hydrophobia, where the party is tormented both with thirst, and fear of the
water, his speedy cure is to be flung over head and ears in the water; such a
sort of Physic would heal our madness. You know my meaning. Since Fogs and
Mists are usual in the counsels of Providence; something may be sometimes
undertaken, where there is little encouragement. It Is not a shame to be
overcome, where it is a sin to overcome; nor is it unhandsome that any should be
submitted to him, whom Law and Nature has advanced above all. Consider but
Jupiters complaint to Menippus, That men since the upstart and unknown Gods,
they were disrelished with him, so that he who formerly could hardly open his
eyes for the great smoke of the noble Hecatombs, now without any honor left,
did almost die with hunger. See but what noble blood runs up and down begging
and for god saking it almost, and compassing the earth to and fro, that they
eat, not (as the Itinerant Devil or Ministers so much proposed) that they may
devour. If you have not then abjured your Reason and Conscience, and resolved
also to rebel against the Light, you cannot but face about, and be as you were,
returning again to your old Constitution. When we depart from a wonted Custom,
infallible Hippocrates tells us, our understanding is taken away. I do not here
intend to be an Advocate of Monarchy; there is no such Magnetism in my Reason,
as to be able to draw Abettors, or to warp your affections to a closing with
that Government: Yet fince you know the vergency and inclination of the Nation,
whose heads are troubled because they want their Head, it cannot but be your
interest to side with them. Thus like Hercules you may ascend Heaven by your
slaughter: otherwise you are but licensed -- to say Soldiers says all; and
though you kill by Authority, yet you murder, because you do it for Gain and
Pay msto, and make Religion but the Pander of your prey and plunder. Consider
then but our late Governors: One with the sophistry of his tears, and arts of
insinuations, cajold and cheated all parties. The others, what Marriots of men's
Estates have they been? Their covetous hungers were like the eating Ulcers or
sore legs that Beggars use to expose to us, which are usually the worse for our
charity, or never the nearer mending. But what is become of these Legislators?
You have pared off these Wens or King's Evil of their Country, (for so Tully
calls vile and inconsiderate men,) and this collection of Humors you have
worthily discussed, because they would not draw to a head. As Job speaks, A
storm has hurled them out of their place: They were driven forth from among
men, who cried after them as after a thief, and hist these Saltim-banks off of
their Stage. Give me leave now to talk a little Scripture to you, who think you
have the Monopoly of holiness, and count your selves of the sect of the Saints.
You know how Asa was censured for relying upon the Physicians, when he should
have applied himself to his Lord. So the Bloud-issue woman spent all upon them,
and had spent more perhaps, if she had had more to spend; yet she could never
be well until she laid hold upon the Lord. No doubt these State-leeches that
you so much idoll'd, cannot heal our distempers. These Excellentissims, whom ye
adored and looked on as the All-heal, the Altahest, and universal Medicine:
these have been the bane, the poison, and ruin of the Nation. A Parliament of
late days being but Pandora's Box, issuing out our confusions, and miseries,
and woes. They are all Physicians of no value. It Is your true Lord that must be
entertained and embraced, and he will remedy all; it is he alone that will heal
the grievances of all, but those that have desired rather Esau's blessing to
shake off the yoke.

For popular Government, let him that desires that form set it up first in his
own family; there can be nothing but confusion therein, since the people
understand not reason, and for authority and persuasions they despise it; vox
Populi vox Dei, was never understood of Isonomy or levelling. I think I speak
no Riddles: yet I am not of that Church, whose Interest it is said desires most a
King. I will not dispute that point, but I much suspect it: A Loyolist sure can
never be Loyal, and they that have given themselves up to their conduct cannot
wish cordially the Royal return. Confusions in the State is meat and drink to
them, who Nero-like are well pleased to warm themselves at our ruins. Hence
they derive their name from Jesus, because they also came into the World not to
send Peace, but the Sword; to set Kingdoms on fire, or to prolong the flames,
not to extinguish and out them; whence perhaps the foreseeing Godfather
christened their Founder Ignatius. Observe since so much of the Sea of Rome has
been powered in upon us, have not the Waters gone over our head, and struck it
off too? what a design and destruction, and even abominable desolation happened
upon us? See what garboils and divisions they wrought in the State of Venice,
where it is said too, that they divided the very Boys, not so much by their
instructions, as their instruments. Think we to thrive better? Besides how can
these design or work for the regal Restoration, who undoubtedly comes not in
without his Clergy. That Clergy is the salt of the earth, and the throwing down
this salt has been the occasion of all our misfortunes, and the reason too
that the God of flies has blown and tainted here all flesh almost with
Heresies, Villainies, and Rebellion. But I have done: You have my Mite, which I
hope may be as acceptable to you as Taxes: If the discourse has any
countenance of reason, look not you with a bad one upon it. I go not about to
decoy you into your loss; my drift is your glory and your good, who since you
have been counted their Journy-men and Hirelings, it is but just you should look
out for the best Wages. Now to do good to give to Caesar what is his, and to do
as you would be done unto; these are things by which you will gain most. Thus
you may merit a Crown above, and the White Robe, which is better far, then a
Red ^oat.

FINIS.

