AN OBSERVATION AND COMPARISON Between the Idolatrous Israelites, And Judges of
England.

A Word to the ARMY.

A Memorandum, with twelve Propositions, tendered to the Parliament; and an
Encouragement to all faithful hearts in Parliament, Army, and Commonwealth.

Lastly, a Call to all those that will follow the Lamb: Published for the
satisfaction of all wellminded People.

By H. N. a well-wisher to Englands freedom and prosperity.

Non nobis solum natisumus.

LONDON, Printed for L. Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-headalley, 1659.

In the first place, we present our friends with an observation of the power of
the living God, from the year 41. till 59. with a Comparison between the
Idolatrous Israelites, and the backsliding Army and Judges of England.
DEar Friends, and Fellow Sufferers, if you do but consider the power of the
living God, you cannot but acknowledge, That unless the Lord had been on our
sides, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick; and if you
observe the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 105. 14. how he declares the mercies and
wondrous works of God, who reproved Kings for their sakes, how he delivered
them out of bondage, bringing forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness, giving them the lands of the Heathen, and they inherited the labors
of the people: you may see the reason wherefore he did it, at the 45. verse of
the 104. Psalm. viz. That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.
But take notice, Psalm. 106. 13, 39, 40. verses, they soon for at his works:
They waited not for his counsel: They were defiled with their own works, and
went a whoring with their own inventions. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord
kindled against his people, and he delivered them into the hands of those that
hated them. O. C. Nevertheless he remembered for them his Covenant, and
repented according to the multitude of his mercies.

Now compare and call to mind, had not the enemy, that inhumane enemy (which
neither feared God nor respected man) swallowed us up quick, if the Lord, the
Lord of hosts, had not delivered us, reproving Kings for our sakes, bringing us
forth with joy and gladness? Ought we not to have executed judgment and
justice? Was it not our duty to have delivered the oppressed, to have broken
every yoke? But alas! you may read our condition first and last, 106. Psalm. 10,
11. He saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed them from
the hand of the enemy. The waters covered their enemies. And thus the Lord
delivered us, in 46, 47, 48. Then observe how exactly we imitated them at the
12. verse, Then believed they his words, they sang his praise: so did Oliver.
But Mark! at the 13. verse, They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his
counsel, but lusted, etc. And as the Israelites made a calf in Horeb, and
worshipped the Molten Image: So the Judges of this Nation made a Protector, and
waited upon his counsel; and when he died, they made an image of him in whom
they trusted; and brought it into the house of their priests at Westminster,
where it remains to this very day: 106. Psalm. 21. to the 29. They forg at God
their Savior: Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and the
plague broke in upon them, verse. 30, 31. Then stood up Phinehas and executed
judgment, and so the plague was stayed: And that was counted unto him for
righteousness, unto all generations for evermore.

Let this example therefore of Phineas stir up all faithful hearts, both in
Parliament, Army and Commonwealth, speedily to execute Judgment and Justice
upon evil doers without partiality. Considering that the Lord may justly bring
a plague upon us, for our notorious wickednesses and abominations.

A Word to the Army.
O all ye faithful in the Army,
THis is the time wherein you must either act like men, or as mere Mercenaries
and Vassals, both enslave your selves and us your oppressed Contrymen, and
quondam-fellow-Souldiers, with whom we formerly engaged, for that Good Old
Cause, for which the lives of thousands of our friends and relations have been
courageously lost, and their bloods freely spent, to redeem, and set at liberty
the good people of this Nation, from Tyranny and oppression: In the
accomplishment whereof, after we had so undauntedly, and resolvedly ventured
our lives and estates; Nevertheless, like the children of Israel, we were
reduced and carried back from that good work; and when we looked for Judgment
and Justice, behold oppression, and Tyranny; for Righteousness, and behold a
cry. At which time, a selfish power, and deluding spirit, stealing the hearts
of the Army, got the upper hand, thinking thereby to establish and set up it
self, and its own Interest, above the Interest and kingdom of Jesus Christ:
and who more active in that work, then the Priests of this Nation? and who more
satisfied with it? or countenanced from it, then they? They were the men would
have maintained it with their lives and estates: and soon after their Lord
Protector Richard was proclaimed, and that they thought he would never be
removed; O then what feigned demonstrations of joy they made, what flattering
Addresses, what hypocritical prayers and wishes they had; and how they daubed
with untempered Mortar, most men have taken notice of; and those that please to
read the Diurnals, may find this truth. And when any of the honest godly people
reproved them, and told them of their horrible wickedness, Tyranny and
hypocrisy, then had they framed mischief by a Law, imprisoning, hanging,
murdering, starving, and destroying them. There is a people can produce the
names of twenty odd in fellowship with them, who have been murdered by them,
besides such as are imprisoned for conscience sake; who to this day, lie
groaning and lamenting in dungeons, without any consideration had of their
sufferings, who are still traveling with us, to be delivered from bondage and
slavery. Now behold you faithful in the Army, where is your bowels of
compassion? declare whether we, having lost our limbs, relations, and estates,
in the quarrel, have not an Interest in, and among you, whether you will own
and follow the Lamb Jesus Christ, and whether we may exepct from you, that
Freedom, Justice, and Equity, we have (with you) so long contended (and are
still contending) for, or no. If it will be your ends, and design, in a new
method and way of policy, still to enslave us; Behold, deliverance shall come
some other way, for our Redeemer is mighty.

A Memorandum to the Parliament, with twelve Propositions, tendered to their
speedy Consideration.
Gentlemen and Fellow-Commoners:
IN the beginning of that unnatural War, Anno 1641. We were called forth and
conjured by several Declarations of Parliament, to the defense of your, our own
and the peoples just Rights and Privileges. And, as you may read in the
beginning of a Remonstrance of many thousand Citizens, and other Free born
people of England, directed to their own House of Commons, occasioned through
the illegal and barbarous imprisonment of that famous and worthy Sufferer for
his Countries Freedom, Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn; You may there find the
power we entrusted you withal, which follows in these words.

Vide a Remonstrance Anno 1646.
We are well assured, yet cannot forget, that the cause of our choosing you to
be Parliament Men, was to deliver us from all kind of bondage, and to preserve
the Commonwealth in peace and happiness* for the effecting whereof, we possessed
you with the same power that was in our selves to have done the same: For we
might justly have done it our selves, without you, if we had thought it
convenient; choosing you (as persons whom we thought fitly qualified, and
faithful) for avoiding some inconveniences.

But ye are to remember, this was only of us but a power of trust (which is
ever revokable, and cannot be otherwise) and to be employed to no other end,
then our own well-being: nor did we choose you to continue our trust longer then
the known established constitution of this Commonwealth, will justly permit;
and that could be but for one year at the most: for by our Law, a Parliament is
to be called once a year, and oftener (if need be) as ye well know. We are your
Principals, and you our Agents; it is truth which you cannot but acknowledge:
For if you or any other shall assume or exercise any power that is not derived
from our trust and choice thereunto, that power is no less then Usurpation, and
an oppression from which we expect to be freed, in whomsoever we find it; it
being altogether inconsistent with the nature of just Freedom, which we also
very well understand, etc. But how ye have discharged this our trust, let the
righteous God judge between you and us; for though we are willing to go
backward, and cover your shame, yet we know your works: be watchful and
strengthen the things that remain, that are ready to die, for we have not found
your works perfect before God: Remember therefore how ye have read and heard;
and hold fast, and repent, for behold, the Lord has heard our cries, and is
come down to deliver us. And you are brought back, either to perfect that Good
Work which has lain so long in your hands, or else that the Lord may make
known to you (as he did to Pharaoh) his Almighty power and Omnipotency.

Therefore take heed that you harden not your hearts, lest the Lord bring upon
you as great plagues, as he did upon Pharaoh: let justice and truth be
countenanced, and not Laws made, making men offenders for a word, laying snares
for them that reprove in the gate. Let not Oliver Cromwell (who provided for the
widow and fatherless) rise up in judgment against you, and condemn you.

Finally, we complain at this present, as the good people complained 1646. viz*
that ye are extremely altered in your demeanor toward us: In the beginning,
you seemed to know what Freedom was, made a distinction of honest men, whether
rich or poor, all were welcome to you, and ye would mix your selves with us, in
a loving and familiar way, void of courtly observance or behavior.

Ye kept your Committees doors open, all might hear and judge of your dealings;
hardly you would permit men to stand bare-headed before you, some of you
telling them, ye more regarded their health, and that they should not deem of
you as of their domineering Courts: ye and they were all one, all Commons of
England, and the like ingenuous carriage; by which Ye wan our affections, to
that height, that ye no sooner demanded any thing, but it was effected: Ye did
well then, who did hinder you? To pass by the multitude of precious Lives have
been lost, and the mass of moneys which have been raised, and for all that, the
noble, patient, faithful Soldier's forced to sell his Debenters (the price of
his blood and travels) at 2 s. 6 d. per pound, or 3 s. 4 d. at most, would make
rational men almost mad to consider. The Customs were thought an oppression at
the beginning, nevertheless is now confirmed with many augmentations; truly it
is a sad thing, but too true. A plain quietminded man in any place in England,
is just like a harmless sheep in a thicket, can hardly move or stir but he
shall be scratched, and lose his wool: and none are so ill used, as honest
Godly men. And now if ye believe there is a God, ye must believe it; and if you
do believe it, and consider the ways ye have trod, and truly repent, show it
by walking contrary to what ye have done, and let us quickly and speedily
partake thereof; For God is a God that takes vengeance, and will not suffer
you to go on to our Ruin.

Twelve Propositions tendered to the Parliaments speedy Consideration, from
many Thousands in and about the City of LONDON.
1. THat all which profess Jesus Christ, may be assi^ted, defended and
encouraged, of what opinion soever. But as for blasphemers, or such whose lives
and conversations are not agreeable to their doctrines, we detest and abhor, as
enemies to the Cross of Christ.

2. That Justice and Equity may be equally, impartially and speedily
distributed; that the honest people be no longer defrauded and ruined: and let
this be your work, and go through with it; refer it not to this day and that
day, for it is the greatest oppression this day in England, and far more
insupportable then either King or House of Lords.

3. That none may be imprisoned for conscience sake, or suffer as Malefactors,
but by due process in Law, and a Jury of their equals. And that all such as
have been spoiled, illegally imprisoned, banished or abused, may be forthwith
recal'd, the imprisoned freed or condemned, their cases heard, their suffering
and ruins repaired.

4. That such as have purchased vast Estates by defrauding the soldiers of
their Debenters (the price of their bloods) or have by any unjust ways or
means, couzened and cheated the Nation, either as Committee Men, Excise-men,
Treasurers, Sequestrators or Collectors, may be examined how they have gotten
such Estates, and by the mouths of two Witnesses and a Jury of their
neighbors, they may stand and abide such sentence as shall be agreeable to
Equity.

5. That such as have betrayed the Liberties of the People so long contended
for, and such as have been impeached and secluded the Houses of Parliament for
Treason, may be brought to Judgment.

6. That the Estates of all dishonest unconscionable persons may be sold, who
have put themselves prisoners into the Upper Bench, of purpose to defraud their
honest Creditors, who out of love and good will, in their necessities, trusted
them with their moneys, and goods; in thankfulness whereof, they thereby cheat
and cousen them, instead of a recompense. There they lie drinking, swearing,
and consuming other men's Estates: and in our judgments, are far worse then
thieves, or highway men; What think you English men? ought not this to be
redressed, and satisfaction made to honest Creditors?

7. That none be impressed or compelled to serve as soldiers in the Wars,
(except in case of necessity, by reason of foreign Invasion) nor yet be forced
out of the Nation upon foreign Services.

8. That speedy course may be taken for paying and satisfying the Army, who are
so much in arrear, that some of them are forced to great wants and
extreamities; that so they may discharge their Quarters honestly, and not be
beholden to Tapsters and Ostlers.

9. That all differences in Law may be heard and determined in every County,
without fraud or delay; to the end that all honest laborious people in this
Nation, may enjoy that little which is justly their own, with peace and
content: which will be the greatest good any Parliament can do.

10. That trading (the external life of the Commonwealth) may be revived and
encouraged; and some present course taken for the advance thereof: which will
add new life to this languishing Nation, and induce the people to follow their
callings with delight and comfort.

11. That all poor, old, blind, lame, sick, and imprisoned, which lie begging
and crying in the streets, may be carefully provided for, both as members of
Jesus Christ, and your fellow Christians; That there may be no more groaning,
nor complaining in our streets.

12. That this present Parliament may have bounds, and be subject to the Laws
of this Nation, as well as others; and that some period and term of time be set
down (as a year) when they shall be dissolved: That thereby they may taste of
subjection as well as rule; and know how to consider other men's cases, as what
may come to be their own. Otherwise, in stead of one Tyrant, we shall have a
thousand.

And you shall perceive, we have not yet left our true English confidence, but
are willing, that both you and all our neighbor Nations, shoud know, that we
both see and know all stratagems and policies that are laid in wait to entrap,
and so to enslave us; and that we bid defiance (now, as formerly) to the worst
our enemies can do. And we would not have you to be discouraged in attempting
whatsoever is evidently just: for we will therein assist you to the last drop
of our bloods. Fear neither the Anakims, nor the sons of the Giants, for the
Lord our God, he will stand by you in all things that are just, and will bless
and prosper you therein. Forsake and utterly renounce all crafty and subtle
intentions; hide not your thoughts from us, and give us encouragement to be
open breasted unto you.

And now, if ye shall conscionably perform your trust the year ensuing, and
order the Parliaments to succeed as aforesaid, then we shall not doubt to be
made absolute freemen in time; and become a just, plenteous, and powerful
Nation. All that is past will be forgotten, and we shall have cause to rejoice
in your wisdom and fidelity.

We conclude with a Call to all those that will follow the Lamb.
ANd we hereby cry and call to all those that will follow the Lamb Jesus
Christ, and own him to be King, Priest, and Prophet: O come, come quickly, and
his Banner over you shall be love: stand no longer disputing and catching at
shadows, but unite as one man for Justice and Righteousness: O how good and
joyful a thing it is for brethren to live together in unity! Love and unity,
like arrows in the Quiver, are not to be broken; one by one, is the conquest of
a finger. But if no arguments can move you to love, we pronounce that you have
no Interest in Jesus Christ, you are none of his Disciples. You know many brave
English spirits which would yet never bow their knees to Baal, who have
suffered both imprisonment, banishment, and death it self: And shall we now
give over? shall we now give over the work of the Lord? shall any thing
separate us from the love of Jesus Christ? shall tribulation or persecution? we
are persuaded, neither life nor death, principalities nor powers, Parliament
nor Army, things present, or things to come, shall be able to hinder us from
following that Lamb. And now to the end we may, like true English men,
consider and compassionate one another burdens and sufferings, we desire that
those noble spirits would meet every Thursday or Sunday, about 7. of the clock
in the morning, at the Tomb of Mr. Jo. Lilburn, in order to concord and unity;
and that we may be better known one to another, and that we may comfort and
encourage one another in the work of the Lord, as the Lord has commanded by
the Prophet I say, saying, Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble
knees, say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: Behold,
your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he will come to
save you, Isa. 35. 3, 4.

FINIS.

