AN ANSWER TO A BOOK CALLED The Quakers Catechism, Put out by RICHARD BAXTER.

Wherein the Slanderer is searched, his Questions Answered, and his Deceit
discovered, whereby the Simple have been deceived: And the Popery proved in his
own bosom, which he would cast upon the Quakers.

Published for the sake of all who desire to come out of Babylon, to the
Foundation of the true Prophets and Apostles, where Christ Jesus is the Light
and Corner Stone; where God is building a Habitation of Righteousness and
everlasting Peace; where the Children of Light do rest.

Also some Quaeries for the discovering the false Grounds of the literal
Priesthood of these days, in the last times of Antichrist.

If you know the truth, the truth shall make you free. James Nailor. London,
Printed in the Year* 1655.

AN ANSWER TO A BOOK CALLED The Quakers Catechism.
To thee Richard Baxter,
WHo have bent thy Tongue against the Innocent, casting out thy envious
slanders against the Lamb, who is appeared against the oppression and deceit of
all sorts of people, who have professed his pure Name in words, but have not
joined to his life and Spirit; but are joined to the worldly lovers, and stand
in your own will, and the poor is oppressed by him that is too strong for him;
and with that proud Spirit art thou joined, pleading its cause against the
Lamb, who cannot bow to any unrighteousness, and against him art thou fighting
with the same weapons that ever thy Generation used. Can thou behold, and not
blush at the lies thou have mustered up in this book against the truth? Is this
the end of all thy profession, that thou art become a bloody persecuter? Is
there no difference with thee now, between suffering for conscience sake, and
burning a Thief in the hand? thou art he that ever numbered the Lamb amongst
transgressors; and what are we, that thou art set against a poor despised
people, trodden upon every where, at your wills and pleasures? Will this be for
your honor, to combine together against a people, which by thy own words are so
contemptible? Is all your proud hye-flovvn spirits joined against so low a
people, that any one can trample under-foot? It Is easily seen, there is
something in the bottom, of greater price then all that is visible; else why
should you gather thus from all Quarters? truly this will not be for your
peace, He against whom you are risen will break you: to pieces, what ever
become of our persons; and thou vvilt see the day, Rich: Baxter, when thy
deeds will come to remembrance, and thy slanders set in order, and thou shall
see to whom thou art an enemy, though now thou be wilfully ignorant of him;
Were there any jot of his fear left in thee, might thou not once look back, and
see thy vvays to be such as none of Christ's Ministers were ever found in? Do
thou believe that ever thy works must be proved, or that thy Kingdom of Sin
must come to an end? must not thy Covenant of sin be broken? though thou intend
it for term of life, yet remember thy latter end: Was not ever the old
Persecuters as blind as thou art, till wrath was upon them from Heaven? must
they account for it that do not visit him in Prison, and shall such escape as
cast in Prison? Will it avail thee then to say, thou knevv not that it was he?
Is not this sufficient ground for thee to suspect thy way, seeing none of
Christ's was ever in it before? but remember now thou art warned, while thou
have time.

Though striving for master-hood, and vain jangling I abhor, yet for the truths
sake, and the seed that is scattered, I cannot be silent, but must reprove that
lying Spirit that is gone out into the World, and has got entrance, and has
hardened many who sometimes were somewhat tender; but now has he brought
them forth against the Lamb to battle, and he has none like these for his
design, being finely covered with words, but their Works find them out:
Blessed be God for ever.

In what thou writes to the Reader, in thy Book, thou says thou says thou
supposes he will marvel thou troubles thy self with so vvilde a Generation,
as the people called Quakers are; or that thou writes these fevv hasty lines on
such an occasion: but thou say thou vvilt tell the cause, which is, that
they have sent to thee five several Papers, one of them with these Quaeries
which thou Answers; and others of them almost nothing but a bundle of filthy
railing words, as Serpent, Liar, Deceiver, Child of the Devil, cursed
Hypocrite, dumb Dog.

I say every rational man may well marvel that these words should be so hastily
by thee called filthy railing words, who professes thy self a Minister of Jesus
Christ, and the Scripture thy rule; seeing there is not one of these words, but
by the spirit of Jesus Christ they have been used, to such who are in that
nature to whom they belong; and the same Spirit can do no other but use the
same words, without respect of persons, where ever any is found in that
practice. Had thou said we had been railers, the sin had not been so great;
but to say those words given forth by the holy Ghost, as is plain in Scripture,
are filthy railing words: here thou calls the Spirit filthy and unclean: but if
thou read, Mark 3. 29, 30. there thou may read thy blasphemy, and what
generation thou art of, and what shall befall thee: Do thou profess thy self a
Minister of Christ, and says the Scriptures are the word, and calls the
Language of them filthy railing words? That ^hese words belong to thee, and
that thou art in the same Generation against whom they were spoken, I shall
manifest it from thine own mouth, and bring thine own Book to witness against
thee, and leave them to any honest heart who shall read them both, to judge, if
thou be not found in the same practice, and so guilty of the same reproof. I
tell thee, the Scribes and Pharisees, and false Prophets, might have had more
show to have spoken thus of these words then thou have; for they had no
Scripture that had them in; but thou professes that Scripture, which declares
of the words from whom they were spoken, and to what sort of people, and art
found in their works; and of such Christ himself was judged to be besides
himself: and we are called a wild Generation. So the servant is no better then
his Lord: and the Scripture is fulfilled.

Thou say further, They chose a day to come into your assembly, and fell a
questioning the Preacher thine assistant, and because he avoided disputing with
them and fled, therefore they called him the hireling that flees, and so
confessed themselves to be Wolves. I say that you are hirelings, is plain by
your practice: and thou confesses he avoided to dispute with them, and fled,
and was not this true? but though the hireling did flee, does this prove them
Wolves? or did they then confess themselves to be Wolves? if they did not, then
he that says they did, is a Liar: But say thou, it seems they referred it to
John 10. 12. I say that place, though it declare you to be hirelings, yet does
it not declare all to be Wolves that come to dispute with you, unless they be
found guilty of devouring the people, as you are found guilty, in preaching for
hire. But that they chose out a day when thou should be absent, is false: for
the Spirit of the Lord, by which we are guided, regards neither person nor
places; but though they mist thee then, did not they meet with thee at
Worcester, even in the high place where thou was preaching, and there demanded
of thee, How the Ministers of Christ, and the Ministers of Antichrist might be
known? but could get nothing from thee, more then from thine assistant, unless
such words as these, people regard him not; and words stirring up the people to
hale them out: which being readily executed by thy hearers, prevented the
hirelings fleeing; but Tho: Good air staying till thou had done, and then
speaking to thee and the people, all the satisfaction he got, was, that he was
haled to prison; yea twice has he been imprisoned by thy Ministry: Oh shame
with thy Epistle and thy Book, may not the Reader read thee a dissembler, who
says they chose a time when thou was confined to thy chamber? thou may well
call these [hasty lines] for had thou taken counsel at wisdom, thou had not
thus manifested thy folly.

Thou say they would not suffer thee to answer them peaceably in their
Assembly without disturbance; I say, had not this been a seasonable time for
thee to have proved thy Ministry, and to have reproved gainsayers? and had not
thy hearers been as able to have kept thee from the disturbance of one man, as
to have haled him out of doors? is not he blind who sees not thee through this
cover? Art not thou ashamed to say, that we are the children of darkness, and
will not bring our deeds to the light, in this particular, as thou do in thy
third pa^e? Could thou have had a better opportunity then before so many
people, and thou in thy high place, where none could disturb thee? but in these
excuses thou layest but open thy own shame, as in the rest of thy book: To send
a man to prison for speaking to thee before thy Congregation, and then accuse
them, that they will not come to the light.

But say thou, I would have answered them in their Assembly: but why not in
thine own? if the things had been profitable, might they not have been
serviceable to them as well as to the other? but above all things, you cannot
endure to be laid open before your hearers: You have led so many blind, and
there have kept them, that if ever they come to see your deeds laid open, you
know you will lose them, so that your best defense is to keep truth and light
out of doors with clubs and halberts, and so to preserve your deeds of darkness
undiscovered: and if any of your hearers begin to look toward the day, or
light of Christ, and find something in their conscience bearing witness
against their sin and wickedness, of all other things you are most afraid, lest
by that they should be guided; showing your selves to be those builders who
most refuse the corner stone, the light of the world; and of all things that
ever were preached; you bid stand afar off from this, as the greatest error.
And whereas thou would make people believe, that we would not suffer you to
come to our meeting; did not Richard Farnworth in one Letter charge thee and
Priest Osland, to come to a meeting which was appointed at Chadwitch, in answer
to your own Letters? which meeting was appointed and kept, and many people of
several judgments came into the meeting with expectations, but neither thou
nor Priest Osland appeared, though you had sent your boasting Letters for a
challenge about the same; such as thou, no wonder, though thou preach down the
light, and plead a continuance in sin; whilst thou lives, who makes no more
use of the light in thy conscience, in thy writings and actions.

Thou say, they charged thee in the name of the most high God to answer their
Questions in writing, that they might Print them with their reply.

And (say thou) if I wr^te to them they will print it, therefore thou
chosedst rather to print thine own papers, how mean soever, then let them do it.

I say, how does thy speech bewray thee, who whilst thou art accusing us for
not bringing our deeds to the light; thou confesses our publishing things, has
put thee upon Printing: and are they to be blamed for charging thee to answer
their Questions in writing, who would neither come to their meeting, nor suffer
them to speak at thine, but sent them to Prison; and calls it no more
persecution, then to burn a Thief in the hand; but though they charged thee to
answer either in writing or printing; yet another Principle guides thee in
uttering these falsehoods: that they charged thee not.

Two Objections, thou say that thou sees, will be raised against thee; o^e
is, that the persons are so contemptible, and the errors so gross, that it is a
needless work to strive against them: To which thou answers, that our
multiplying where we come, and the salvation of poor Christians makes the
necessity.

To which I say: What Generation thou art of, who holds the persons of any
contemptible, is easily judged by any who have that spirit, which respects no
man's person, but from that Spirit you are grossly erred: And for our
multiplying, that must increase to thy torment, and all Babylons Merchants; for
God is multiplying his seed as the Stars of Heaven, though Gog and Magog be
gathered against it, yet to the brightness of his rising shall the Nations
come, and the desire is kindling now after the shakings, Isa. 6. 3. Hag. 2. 7.
and the Lamb has set up his standard, whereat all the beasts of the field
rage; yet he will take the victory; and for thy salvation thou tells on, what
do thou intend to save them from, who art preaching up sin as long as they
live?

And again thou say, Its but the Churches of the Separatists and Anabaptists,
that are emptied by these Seducers, and its best to let them alone to keep
their own flocks.

I say, Some of your Churches are so emptied, that you have few left to hear
you, but profane persons, swearers, oppressors, drunkards and fighters, such
as beat in your synagogue, and these are become your prime hearers: but can
thou not see thy confusion, who in thy last was saying, We multiply where we
come, and now Its but the Churches of the Separatists and Anabaptists: then,
why cries thou out of so much danger? does not thy speech bewray thee? but
say thou, Here and there one of the unsettled sort, or that had no Religion,
inclines to them.

I say therefore, one day shall those whom you have most settled in your deceit,
have most cause to curse you, when they shall see them come from far, and sit
down in the Kingdom, and themselves cast out.

Say thou, I had far rather they had continued Separatists and Anabaptists,
then turn Quakers; therefore would do all thou can to hinder.

I say, thy Generation of Priests was ever haters of the greatest appearance of
truth, and that we can witness. When we were of those Churches, we were hated
by you; when we walked as near as we could to the Letter, though the life we
knew not, but now you have ceased your envy against all them; and against the
Life and Light of Christ in us, is your greatest envy.

And say thou, Its better to stop them where there is some hope of Salvation,
then let them run to perdition.

I say, thou have undertaken two ways to stop us, one is with lies and
slanders, which thy Book is full of; and another way taken with thee and thy
Generation, is to get us stopped into Dungeons and Prisons, and strait watch set,
that none come to us, nor that we may have liberty to write nor speak to any.
But the latter of these is holden by you for the better weapon, yet both to no
purpose, further then to prove our patience and obedience in Jesus; and
yourselves of your Father, and in his works acting, that by them ye may be
known, and we also.

But says thou, I chose rather to tell the world of these passages between us,
then leave them to their reports, especially hearing how they increase in
London, and other parts; and that the ignorant have need of some plain
information* to prevent their Apostasy and Perdition in this temptation.

I say, they are ignorant indeed that needs thy information: and what thou
tellest, is most suitable to the world to be believed; for all who owns that
light that leads out of the world, or where that ey^ is open that leads out of
the world, thy false information is judged and prevented, thy perdition and thy
temptation; and with that Light that sees thee and thy deceit, shall we grow
both in London, and other parts, and thy refuge of lies be swept away.

AS to thy Paper to the Separatists and Anabaptists (as thou calls them) I
desire not to be busy in other men's matters; only this, whereas thou casts it
on the separated people, to be nurseries of impiety, and Infidels: I say, thou
do but here manifest thy shameless Spirit, who matters not what thou say
of others, so thou may but seek thy own praise; for all that know any thing of
the fear of God, knows, that most of those people have separated from you
parish Teachers, upon this very account (to wit) your infidelity and impiety:
and if any amongst them turn so grossly filthy, that they cannot keep them
amongst them, left it should shame their Religion; yet these return to you, who
forthwith receive them, and boast of them as rare Converts; nay, none so bad in
their conversation, but if they have but either Pig or Goose, or ought to be
got toward hire, they are yours, and you are their masters; such as no one
Sort of people in the Nation will join with, but only you, Parish Teachers.

But it seems thou have lost some of thine also, as well as the Anabaptists;
and thou prints a Letter, thou say, thou sent to one of them to reclaim him,
under pretense that he desired thy thoughts of us; and thy evil thoughts thou
returns him in this Letter.

And thou says, He was a young and unsettled one; yet tells how much pains he had
taken in duty, how much zeal he had professed for God: And that he by so great
a work of grace was converted from profaneness, etc. and thus with thine own
shame thou goes about to cover thee, having boasted before, as though none
followed us but separated people, or such as had no Religion, or ever was
accounted so to be. And thou goes on to show him that he must needs be fallen
from grace, because he is fallen from your Ministry, and thy Arguments are such
as these. Are not we those Ministers, and in those Ordinances you despised
before Conversion?

I say, The greatest Papist in the world, having begot a Proselyte, if he turn
away from him, may as well use that Argument as thou, if falling from any such
form, or person be the error; but thou should have first proved thy self a
Minister of Christ in thy life, and thy worship as he appointed it, and not
changed in matter or manner, then had thou said somewhat to the purpose,
else, its no error to deny the hireling, and his false worship, and turn to the
light of Christ, by it to be guided by all deceits. And says thou, Alas! that
ever a man in his wits, should no better know the work of Christ from Satan's,
nor know, that it is the Dragon whose warfare these men do manage. I say, Thou
shameless one, do thou cause the servants of the living God to be hailed to
prison, and suffer them almost to be murdered before thy face, not at all
resisting, but the people by thee stirred up to the thing, and for no other
thing, but coming to declare to thy face against thy false worship, which God
ever sent his servants to do. And faist thou, We manage the war of the Dragon,
and do the work of Satan: Is not the war of the Dragon, to devour the Lamb
where he is manifest? which ever was the work the hirelings was found in; and
is it not the Devil that casts into Prison the innocent, Rev. 2. 9* 10. and was
ever any under the Gospel found in that work; but such who was of the synagogue
of Satan, though they called themselves Jews, as you call your selves
Christians, but in the same nature and deeds: And do we manage the Dragons war,
who suffer all this at your hands, and much more? prove that in Scriptures, or
be ashamed of thy false accusation, and take it to thy self, till thy rage
cease, and thou give over devouring the Lambs: Such never take pains with men's
souls, who takes care, and lays snares to destroy their bodies: Christ's sheep
was never such wolves, by their fruits we know them; they who believe these to
be Christ's Ministers, may soon believe the Devil is God (as thou say) who
would be worshipped and obeyed in you.

Thou further goes on, and tells him, whence this error comes, even from
Hellish pride; and to prove this, thou tells him, Where we have spent one hour,
thou have spent an hundred in study and meditation, and prays to God for his
Spirit of truth and grace, and that thy Prayers is as earnest as ours, and thy
life is much more holy and heavenly then ours, and therefore God is as it were
more engaged to thee, to make known his truth to thee, then to us; and is not
this apparent pride for us to be so confident, that we are wise and beloved in
the eyes of God; and, that we run about with the shells on our head, etc. in
comparison of thee.

I say, the hellish pride thou have plainly discovered, where it is. But whose
righteousness is all this by which thou have thus engaged God to thee, who art
but yet praying for the Spirit of truth and grace* will God be engaged with thy
graceless lying spirit, which thou uses in this thy Book, wherein thou utters
so many graceless untruths, to engage the world to thee? thou art mistaken, God
will not be so engaged, nor with that Spirit; he will be served with his own.
Thy earnest prayers and righteousness, before the Spirit of truth and grace,
and without it; how they engage God, thou may read in 1 Kings 18. from the
16. to the 30. and Luke 18. 11, 12. and there thou may read thy boasting lines,
and their acceptance, and thy engagements, and thy name; We know, God freely
gives a measure of his Spirit to every one of us, freely to profit withal; and
improving that to his praise, we receive more freely; and we are so far from
engagement of God by all we do, that we find our selves unprofitable servants,
but this thou know not with thy va^n light words, who tells of our running
away with the shell on our head: Our head thou knows not, who must break thee
to pieces with all thy light boasting vain words: Thou tells of Paul
forewarning Timothy to ordain none who was a novice, lest he should be lifted
up with pride, and so fall into the condemnation of the Devil; then thou may
take this back a^ain, and apply it, and therein read thy self, and thy end in
whom the pride is sound, and not in the Quakers, and they are blind who cannot
see it: And tho^ say, Pride is the master sin of the Quakers, and thou proves
it, because that we go in a poor garb, and cry our-against pride, as if we were
sent from Heaven to persuade men to wear no lace, cuffs or points, and to damn
so many Ministers for being called Master: But say thou, spiritual pride is
the most killing, and so goes on railing against us for these things, calling
that spirit in scorn, An excellent Spirit, that can trample on all worldly
glory: I say, Blasphemer, thou shall know when thou have finished thy rage,
that thou have spoken against the holy Spirit of God, sent from Heaven, which
both in Christ and his Apostles did persuade against, and condemn such things,
which thou by the spirit of the Devil would uphold, and do plead for; and
thou sets down four particulars, wherein thou will prove our language of Hell,
and the Devil speaking by our mouths, and the first is, They affirm themselves
perfect without sin; and this thou say is unpossible, and they are mad that
believe it: I say, That we affirm self-perfection, is but thy lying slander; or
that we say we are Christ or God, as thou say we do, but that we witness
perfection from sin, so far as we have received Christ, we own it as Gods
commands and gift, the end of Christ's coming, and of giving forth his
Ministry; as these Scriptures may witness, Matthew. 5. 48. James 1. 17. 1 John
3. 8. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 13. And, that it was the work of the Ministry whereunto
they labored, read Col. 1. 28, 29. and thou that Ministers against this, and
calls it the Language of Hell, and the Devils mouth, which the Scriptures
witness, art a Blasphemer and a Minister of Antichrist, and its no railing to
judge the tree by its fruit; and when thou have done, Thou say, the Devil
himself has less pride then to think himself perfect without sin; and if we
have no sin, what need we pray, or what need have we of the blood of Christ? I
say, Thy confusion is manifest, who before accused us that the Devil spoke this
in our mouths, and now thou art clearing him of it; but what have thou to do,
or he either, with perfection, who art out of Christ, and in your own wills,
worldly-pleasing, and envious, murderers, in rage; what perfection is there,
unless perfect wickedness? neither does perfection exclude praying and the
blood of Christ, for in his blood and prayer it is wrought, and we kept.

Thy second thing is, That we set up our selves above all the people of God on
earth, that we vilify the most holy and eminent servants of God, and condemn
all the Churches of the World. To which I shall say no more but this, That
these are three of thy lies rancked up together, lest thou should fail.

Thy third thing is, That we damn all the people of God for 1600. years at
least: I say, This may well be matter of offense to thee, to deny all thy
Generation since the Pop^ to this day: therefore thou call'st it unmatchable
pride; but ^or those whom you have tortured* martyred and burned, whipped and
imprisoned, to this day, who suffered for conscience sake, follow^ng the Lamb
in their measure, them we own, and with them we suffer; though thou say, God
had never such a people on earth of these men's ways, yet was this the Church of
Christ, whereof he was the head, and is the head, and there it was visible, and
there it is to all who are not blind; but none of these pleaded for honorable
Titles, as thou do, nor none ever did that believed; such was ever out of the
faith, read James 2. to the 10, verse, John 5. 4. and 44. and if these be the
few Heretics (thou tells on) that thou says were our Predecessors of old: I
say, We cannot but own these in their measure, though we go under the name of
Heretics with them, by the same Generation.

Thy fourth thing is, That which thou call our proud, scornful, railing
Language, which thou say should put it out of doubt what spirit we are of, to
any who are acquainted with Christ's Spirit, and of Satan, and are able to judge
of Spirits, and know darkness from light. I say, The Language of Christ we use
to thee, who a^t found in the work of Satan, therefore thou can not bear it;
but thy filthy ^nclean words thou have cast upon us in thy Book, which none in
Scripture ever used, we shall leave to the judgment of Him that judges
Spirits, and to all who know light from darkness: But thou foreseeing thy self
guilty, makes an Objection; It is Scripture Language which they speak, and when
thou have done deceitfully, answerest, saying, The greater your presumptious
sin in making so ill an use of Scripture Language, and calls it, serving Satan;
and thus thou proves i^, saying, What if Christ called Judas a Devil, is it
therefore lawful to call Peter so: I say, yea, If Peter be found in the Devils
work, Matthew. 16. 23. much more thou and thy Generation, who none of you yet
came so far as Peter, who denied all to follow Christ; but you will have all
you can get, though you deny Christ, and all his Rules, for the getting of it;
and such are no faithful servants of Christ, but of their own bellies, and
their lusts and pride; as thou go on still pleading for thy masterhood,
saying, Alas, that a Christian should be so ignorant, as not to know that your
being called Master, and Lord too, is commonly allowed in the Scripture; and
that it is not the Title, but the Lording over men's faith, that is forbidden I
say, All those that know any thing of the Faith of Christ, sees you to be
guilty of both, but will give you neither; which says leads out of respect of
persons, and to serve a better master, then he that bears rule by his means:
And thou tells thy thoughts of us (say thou) it was the main advantage that
the Reformers had for the ruin of the Papal Kingdom, to persuade men that the
Pope was Antichrist; and to disgrace the Popish Clergy, and says thou, They
would attempt the destruction of our Church by the same means: I say, Why not?
why may not that which lopt off some of your b^anches, now the time is come,
cut up the whole root, being laid to it by the same power, in a great measure?
Thou say, Our first way is to bring people in dislike with their Teachers,
without which, we have no hope of succeeding: I say, Why not? you being of
those who ever shut up the Kingdom, therefore Christ, his Prophets and
Apostles, did ever most cry out against the false Prophets, blind Guides and
Hirelings, who in all ages withstood him, coming to his Kingdom, as you do now
with the same weapons in this Generation; and Christ's way is not changed, so
the same woe against you is pronounced, which you must inherit. And whereas thou
say, That the Papists have begotten this present Sect of Quakers: I say, The
Devil is not divided against himself: had we been begot by the Papists, we
should have had more favor from you, who are come of that Line, as having hopes
of us to have been restored to your former Kingdom, which ever stood so much in
multitudes of people, that you might be Lords and Masters over them: And thou
says, We have here and there a Papist, lurking to be the chief Speaker amongst
us: I say, here thou do but manifest thy envy and deceit, to us and the
Commonwealth; if thou know such amongst us, and do not produce it, then art
thou deceitful to the trust of the Nation; but if thou know none, then art thou
a false accuser, and out of thy own mouth art thou judged, who says we are
heade^ with dissembling Friars; and this thou would make people believe with
adding lies, saying that we say, the Pope is not Antichrist, that we undermine
the Scriptures, decry the Ministry, unchurch Churches, slight Justification by
imputed Righteousness, draw men to admire our adherent Righteousness, set up
strength of man's free will, the exalting of Monastical Community and Virginity,
and Alienation from worldly Employment; All this, say thou, the Papists has
taught the Quakers, so thou makes them up ten Lies together: And instead of
proving us headed with Friars, thou have proved the Devil thy head, and father;
for we confess the Pope to be Antichrist, and all your Popish Clergy of his
Lineage, and with the Scriptures we so prove it; which Scriptures we own, with
the true Ministry and Churches, Justification by Christ's Righteousness, freely
put and given to us; whereby our own Righteousness we deny, and set up the
light within us, and witness Revelations, which the hirelings know not,
therefore not common, and we witness a judge above Scripture, and before
Scripture, which we will not change for the Pope and all his Clergy, which we
extol, and do not abstain from worldly Employments further, then by the Lord we
are called, whom we preser before all the world, which is our perfection and
freedom from sin in this life, which none of the Popish Clergy can teach us,
though you may talk on it; but only the Spirit of God, which we witness, which
the Devil and the hirelings never befriended.

Thou makes another Objection, That they hold out many certain truths, and cry
down pride and drunkenness, and worldliness, and cry up mortification, charity
and humility: And in thy Answer, thou say, So do you as well, and better then
we can do; it is common amongst you, and thou hopes a little better maintained:
These you say are Points where you agree with the Papists; I say, much like,
and to the same effect, but see how it is maintained in your practice; thy
crying up humility, is seen in this thy boasting, who says, Thy teaching is
better then we can do; were it the gift of God, thou would see it to be free,
and he not limited (by thy cannot) but free to give it to whom he pleases,
without respect of persons. And for thy charity which thou cries up, is that
it, by which Thomas Goodair was carried twice to Prison, for coming into the
Idol Temple; if that be it, its preached through the Nation, thou might have
saved labor of Printing it; not many of thy Brethren, but they have acted it:
And if thy mortification stands in Cuffs and Ribonds, Lace and Points, being
called Lord and Master, etc. then it cannot be decryed, but thou have cried it
up in thy Book, and that very strongly: And for your crying down pride,
drunkenness, and worldliness, let your Kirks and Markets witness for you or
against you, the effect of your crying, and fruits of your Ministry, which
have all bent your selves in your Pulpits, to Preach up sin for term of Life in
your selves and your hearers; and here, thy crying up Cuffs and Points, and
such like stuffs.

And thou bring against us the Testimony of a Friar, whom thou calls Master
Coppenger, thou say, of the Franciscan order; I say, by the Mastership thou
give him; he is one of thy Order, whereby you are both distinguished, by the
words of Christ to be none of his Ministers, and so fittest for your purpose;
and if reason may judge, most likely came over to second your envy, against
those you call Quakers; else why did not you keep him, seeing the Law required
it, then might it have been proved if he had been a Speaker amongst us; but you
show your selves and your envy in this thing, as in many other, who would force
the Testimony of a condemned person, and he not present, nor no two ever see
him, by thy own confession, in thy Paper; and yet this you Print so often over,
thereby to deprive thousands of their liberty in the service of God, who are
faithful, and have made proof of it, having thereto been called, against the
Popish Clergy and Bishops; and the Powers they stirred up, as the Nation can
witness; and if you were numbered from the first to the last, with your secret
actings against us, there is not many of you in the Nation would be found clear
of it; though now you be stirring up these Powers against the peaceable people,
as you did the other, as a Generation never well, but when you are in mischief;
but our defense is the same against you, who will accomplish his own work, and
set his King upon his hill, notwithstanding your Hellish rage.

Thou goes on telling, if any further ask thee, why the Papists are so diligent
in those works; and thou sets down many hopes we have to accomplish great
things, which words are not worth taking up after thee: But to them all, I
shall say this, Whosoever has but heard of the Blood that has been shed, and
the violence done to the Innocent by your Forefathers, the Popish Clergy,
before they was denied in the Nation; also what Blood has been shed, and
misery undergone, to bring down your power set up in the Presbytery in Scotland
and England, the two last of these, which we can witness by sad experience: I
say, here is small hopes for any that either loves God, or their souls or bodies
either, or the Peace of the Nation, to labor in bringing forth such a birth of
Vipers; nay, we rather rejoice, to see the work begun thus far in the Nation,
whereby he will rid us of the rest of that brood, and their burdens, which is
the greatest oppression that remains in the Nation, though this must be done
with suffering, as the other was done with acting; the Lord having drawn forth
many to that purpose, against whom you are gathered, as the sand for multitude,
yet are we not dismayed, though beset on every side, yet not destroyed, for we
know him in whom we have believed.

And thou say, Consider well of that Scripture Ephesians. 4. 12, 13, 14. etc. where
Christ gave Ministers for edification, unity, and the perfecting of the Body;
amongst which thou have thrust in thy cursed addition, saying (at last) the
perfecting of the body: I say, When must that last be, seeing thou have denied
any perfection whilst any lives in this world; it seems thou dreams your
Ministry must last in another world, else how must you perfect them by your
Ministry; or shall death do that which cannot be done, while they are living?
So we have considered of that Scripture, and find you to be none of those
Ministers whom Christ gave, nor Ministering for that end, but against it, and so
Ministers of Antichrist, blaspheming the work of God; who call his power, at
which all flesh shall tremble, the power of the Devil: And say thou, If you
turn to the Quakers, we shall know that you were before an unsettled Novice; and
thou brings that of 1 John 2. 19. they went out from us, but they were not of
us: I say, What have thou to do with these words* John was no hireling, nor
Persecuter as thou art: thou art one of those which John forewarns of, who
abides not in the Doctrine of Christ; and all that owns John, or his Epistle,
must keep thee out of their Houses, and have naught to do with thee* if thou
read his second Epistle, 9, 10, 11 verses, there thou may read thy self cast
out by John's Ministry, and there ^s few that comes from thee, need to look for
ought but reproaches, for then the hope of thy gain is lost, further then thou
takes by force: And thou falls a praying the Lord to open his eyes, and
acquaint him with his great darkness and imperfection: I say, what eye is that
which thou would have opened, since thou denies the Light within: Is the man
blind of his bodily eyes, and to what end should he see his imperfection,
seeing that thou denis that ever perfection can be attained to? Thy Prayers are
an abomination, and they are blind indeed, that stands in need of such a
Teacher, and knows no better spirit to pray with.

Then thou makes an Oration, before thou Answers the Quaeries, wherein thou
tells of several Papers, which thou received from seve^al persons; as one Jane
Hicks, Tho: Chandler, and Edward Newway, Richard Farnworth, and Tho: Goodair;
but not being acquainted in the business, and seeing nothing herein of moment,
but what is answered in other places; I shall leave it till more knowledge of
the thing.

Then thou goes making a show, as that thou would Answer our Quaeries, and
these thou folds up by six together, which thou can not answer; and sends us
to a Book, we know not where, to seek an Answer, which thou calls a Defense of
a Petition; yet though thou Answer not one of the six, in what thou falls short
in Answering, thou makes up in asking; asking ten, where thou answerest not
one: so that instead of answering 24. thou have asked above threescore; but few
of those thou wast asked, have thou gone about to Answer: but thou begins, as
follows, with our first Quaery, and thy false slanders and lies thou casts
upon us, are double to thy Quaeries, as I shall make it appear, if I be called
to number them; but I am weary with raking in that filthy puddle, yet thy
Queries are answered, and some of thy lies disproved.

In page 43. line 12. for the Letter, read Christ.

OUr 1. Query is, What Is the first Principle of pure Religion? Thy answer is*
That God is, and ne^t, that he is a rewarder of them that dil^gently seek him;
and thou queries the ground of our asking.

I say the ground of our asking is, that the folly of such Teachers as know net
God and his way, may be made manifest, as it is by thy Answer; for the
knowledge of what God is, is the substance, ground, and end of all pure
Religion: which admits of no second; for it is life eternal. But if thou say
thou means believing, there is a God then there is something God has appo^nted
as a way to God, which must be learned before God can be known, wherein the
creature must be principled, which must turn the mind toward God, before the
creature know God, seeing God is not known to the world, till the creature be
turned out of the world: So says Christ, No^e knows the Father, but to whom
the Son reveals him: such a^ thou have got the name of God to talk on; but when
you should come to principle people in the way to him, you say, God is it:
which if bare saying God is it, be all thou can do, in way of teaching, then
you may stop your mouths (if it be not for losing your gain) for all can say
that there is a God as Jam. 2. 1^.
well as thou; yea, the Devil can preach that doctrine, but thou knows if thou
had answered this Query to the satisfaction of any honest desires, then thou
must have confessed to the light that God has given Joh. 8. 12.
in Christ Jesus, to lead out of darkness, but that destroys the Devils
Kingdom; and therefore all his Ministers are deaf of that ear, and so children
of darkness, and keep others so.

2. Query, Whether they are a Church of Christ, that beat and persecute them
that witness forth the truth in his name? And to this thou answered, That its
possible for a true Church to be guilty of injuries; but to cover thy guilt in
this, thou would rank us amongst Turks and Witches; wherein thou shows how thou
would order these injuries done to us, if it were in thy power. And further, to
hide thy self from answering, thou bids us ask this question of the Spanish
Inquisition, and those who have shed the blood of so many hundred thousand true
Christians, etc. I say, we are asking it of the same generation of Priests: who
have all along been the cause of shedding that innocent blood, where they could
prevail with the powers of the earth, to act their bloody ends under religious
pretenses, calling that heresy that crosses their lusts, as its well known,
You cease not to press the Power to it still, and prevail as far as you can,
and where you can, and have used many ways secretly and openly, to undermine
them where you cannot, and where the Magistrate is not ready to execute your
designs, you have some of the baser sort ready with you, that will do it at
your commands: as some of you Priests have set them on, saying, fight lads for
the Gospel. Nay, I can make it appear of above 30 of you, who have fought with
your own hands, many of them to the shedding of much blood, even by the
highway, when the innocent have but passed by. And now wherein do you differ
from them who shed the blood of the Martyrs, unless it be in this, that they
would forbear till they had some show of authority: which you cannot but fall
on with your own hands, showing your thirst to be greater then ever theirs was,
and your selves more shameless: Now if it be not an offense to judge you after
Christ's rule, then findding you to be in the same fruit, we must know the same
Generation all along; and we bless our God who has chained the Devil that he
must but only manifest himself in casting some of us into Prison for our trial,
but cannot have h^s will further, but to show what he would do if he had power;
Praises to our God for ever.

3. Quaery, Thou says is about Infants Baptisin; And not being able to prove
thy practice herein, either by command or example, thou shufles it off with
telling of a Book, and asking a Quaery to the Anabaptists, nothing at all to
the purpose, yet least thou should be found out of thy fathers work, thou
infolds a lie in it, saying, The Anabaptists are our Founders.

And 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Quaeries, Thou say are all about Tithes, but takes a
ready way to escape them; Instead of answering falls a questioning, showing thy
self to be one of those, who can sooner start questions then answer them; and
instead of answering six of ours, thou sta^ts ten of thy own.

Thy first is, Whether we have read any of those Books, that proves that Tithes
are still of Divine Right; I say, by no other Divinity then the Popes
authority, can thou nor all his Clergy prove Tithes to Christ's Ministers to
be by Divine Right; therefore we deny the Pope, his Divinity, his Clergy, and
all their lying Books, and challenge thee and all thy Generation to prove it by
the Book of Scripture.

Thy 2. and 3. Quaeries, Is whether the Scripture does warrant^ man to dedicate
part of his Lands to God for the service of his Church, and is it not lawful to
take what is so dedicated; and thou instances them that sold their Lands in the
Apostles times.

I say, suppose that be granted, that a man may freely give his own to God;
must the hireling therefore take men's goods against their wills, to maintain
such a Ministry and Worship as God never set up, but is denied by him, and all
that ever he sent; nor did the Apostles put the price of other men's Lands into
their purses, but it was distributed to such as had need; and when your
Ministry brings forth the like effect: then take food and raiment freely, as
the Apostles did, but in the mean time do not you spoil men's goods by force,
and call them Robbers of Churches.

4. Quaery, If our Ancestors having given to the church the Tenths, are not
those Church-robbers that now take them away? I say, If my Father had given the
Tenth Land in my field to the hireling, then had he given his own, and no right
had I to have gainsayed that he should have given what was his, but that he
could give the tenth Sheaf, Pig, Goose or Egg, which is Gods blessing and the
fruits of my labors, and never was his, that I deny, and he is the thief that
takes the fruits of another man's labors against his will; for if* I sow no
corn, thou have no sheaf, and if I have no Sow, thou have no P^g* etc. so if my
labors you take, which never was my Fathers: but who gave you money out of
Servants wages, and for smoke passing up peoples Chimneys, Crysomes and
Mortuaries, and such like, which you had all from your Ancestor the Pope, from
whom you had your first rise, Tithes, and maintenance all your Parish Priests;
who so dearly tendered his Children, that least they should want, provided that
there should be no profit, but they should be sure of their share, providing
you a house in every Parish to sleep in, making you Masters; and this Spiritual
Courts to force people to work for you, that you might be sure to have enough,
whosoever wanted; and since those fell, you have been hard put to it, and sore,
afraid you are, least the earthly powers should leave you, for if they do, your
Gospel will starve you; such is the fruits of your plowing and sowin^, and so
your maintenance is as ancient as the Man of Sin, and no elder, and you must
fall together as you have stood together.

5. Quaery, If one that bears the bag, prove a Judas or Thief* (...) one
Nicolas a Deacon, should lead a Sect of Nicholaitans your Predecessors: were
all the Apostles therefore Thieves, or all the Churches and Pastors greedy
Dogs, for taking much more then the Tenth, even men's whole Estates, that gave
them to that use?

I say, That the Nicholaitans is our Predecessors, is one Lie, and that the
Apostles took men's whole Estates, that is another, so we think it not strange,
to suffer with them.

But you that take men's labors against their wills, by force, are much worse
then Judas, and more greedy then all the dumb Dogs we read on, who though they
were (may be) as covetous as you, yet they were never so shameless as to take
it by force, and plead for it, and having got a pretense of a law to cover you,
it must not be called Thievery: but a while will that hide you, God is about to
lay you open, and the Mountains must not cover you; then woe to you.

Thy 6. is, Whether you ask so much of people as Quakers do: Thou shameless
man, whom do we ask any thing on? We abhor thy beggarly practice herein, and
are fed freely; prove whom we have burdened, or asked any thing on: but may be
you will excuse your asking, with taking it by force.

7 Qu. If it be not a wrong to the people more then the Ministers; to have the
standing Church-maintenance taken away, why then do people petition so hard for
Augmentations, where means is wanting? or else do worse: I say, because
Babylons wares are grown Costly, and the Merchants rich: time was, when 50
pounds would have hired a Priest, which now will not serve under 500, yet his
stuff no better, but much worse; and this must needs be raised, whether the
people have it or no, and so they must petition for Augmentations: but he is
blind who believes this is done to right the people of their wrongs, which
lays so many 1000 pounds upon the people of this Nation, more then was
formerly: you are rightly called leaders of the blind; if your followers see no
further, but to believe you herein, you may keep those you have blinded as long
as you can, but where the eye is open, you are seen, and your end.

The sum of thy 8. Quaery, If the Rulers may lay Excise or Taxes; why not a
settled maintenance for you? I say, because the one is allowed on in the
Scripture; but the Magistrate was never to force a maintenance for the
Ministry, neither under Law nor Gospel; but God ever took care for them that
are his; and are you Christ's Ministers, that pleads for settled means? Is he
grown less Careful for his? nay, its you that knows him not, therefore dare
not trust him, but envies such as do.

In thy 9. and 10. Thou tells of God commanding a sufficient maintenance; And
asks what Scripture forbids taking of Tithes: And says God has left it to
humane prudence to judge what is sufficient, before they give it. And thou
tells the old lie over again, saying, The Apostles took more then the tenths; I
say, out of thy own mouth be thou judged, and thy generation, who takes it
where humane prudence judges not fit to give you, even from them, who reap
nothing by you, and that God has commanded any maintenance at all for the
hirelings, I deny; on any things by force of Law, for his own, or any other way
but freely. And he that reads Heb. 7. with the first verse of the 8th, may see
Tithes preached down, Priests, and Priesthood, that did receive them, though
they never had the^^ by force.

10. Qu. Whether Christ enlightens every one that comes into the world: And
thy answer is; All that come into the world of nature, he enlightens with the
light of nature, and this thou says is begotten by the Book of the Creature:
And all that comes into the world of grace, he enlightens with the light of
supernatural Revelation: I say, Thou have plainly showed thy knowledge of
Christ, and his way of working, who says, That light which Christ enlightens
the Creatures with, is begotten by the Creatures Book; and this light which is
so begotten, which thou calls natural, is all the light the Creature has till
he comes into the world of grace: Then (say thou) he is enlightened with a
supernatural Light. Thou blind guide, does any light lead into the world of
grace, as thou calls it, but the light of Christ, and is that begotten by the
Creatures Book? Art not thou Antichrist, who art setting up another way out of
the world, then Christ and his light, who says, I am the Light of the world,
he that follows me, shall not abide in darkness: Was this light natural, or
begotten by the Creatures Book? was that a natural light, that Covenant of
light that God promised to give into the world, which the Prophets prophesied
of, and John bare witness of, saying, This is the true light that enlightens
every one that comes into the world: And this is the condemnation that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness: Did ever any give such a testimony
of the light, which God sent into the world, to call it natural, and say, Its
begotten by the book of the Creature? Art not thou a blind guide indeed, yet
being told of it, calls it railing; where thou might as well say Christ railed,
who told such blind guides (who denied the corner Stone) what they was, yet
was they never so blind as thou, for they did not deny but Christ should be
the light of Israel, when he came; but thou says he is come, and yet art
setting up a creature light; and to blind the business with, thou adds a heap
of Quaeries: 1. Whether this light be sufficient to leave men without excuse;
or is it sufficient to salvation? I say, both to condemn such as love their
evil deeds, and to lead to life all that follow it, John 3. 19. and 8. 12. 2.
Was i^ su^ficient before Christ preached the Gospel, or is it now sufficient to
all that never heard the Gospel? If so, is not the Gospel needles^* I say, all
that believed in him to come, had sufficiently of his light to guide them, in
what God then required; but when he was come, then the Gospel was preached to
every Creature under Heaven, then all was called to repent, and wait for the
Kingdom of God, which was at hand within them, which they did not know who
denied the li^ht, yet the light being come into the world, was their
condemnation; and thus the Gospel is not a needless thing, but the power of God
to salvation to all that receive it: for as many as received the light, to them
he gave power to become the Sons of God, to the rest it is condemnation. 3.
Quaery, If the world have sufficient light, what need they your teaching? I
say, to exhort them to that light, to wait and abide in it, it being the
hirelings have blinded that eye, this time of the Mystery of Iniquity has been
working, which was began in the Apostles time; and to open this eye was Paul
sent, and 2 Cor. 4. 6.
to turn them from darkness to this light; and this answers thy fifth Query,
why Paul was sent to open the blind eyes and turn to light.

4. Query, If all have sufficient light within them, What need there any
converting grace? That Is converting grace that has appeared to all men,
teaching us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly 2 Tit. 11. 12.
lusts, which such as thou turns into laciviousness, and will not be taught by
it, therefore lives in sin, and pleads, So you must do while you live; and thou
in scorn bids us rub our eyes, and tells thee, if all have it, why did we
pronounce thee to be in darkness? I say, because thou denies the light, and
follows it not: so that light that is in thee is become darkness, and great is
that darkness, as does appear: who art lying again, saying, the Papists are our
Teachers, but art in the Relics of their worship thy self; for which we with
the light deny them and thee, and your teaching.

Our 11. Query, Whether thou have seen Gods face? And to this thou utters a
deal of confusion, saying, That by the eye of reason, thou have seen God to be
infinite incomprehensible: and says, none has seen God; and then asks a
Query, Whether he that has seen God do abhor himself as Job did? and says, is
it likely that ever those men had the true knowledge of God, who exalt
themselves as having the Spirit, and being perfect men without sin?

I say, Art not thou ashamed of thy folly, who would persuade people, that
having the Spirit, and being without sin could keep from seeing God. Thou blind
sot, Can any come to know God but by the Spirit? and where will thou have this
Spirit if not within? Can he be any of Christ's who has not his Spirit? or can
any unclean Romans 8. 9.
thing stand before God, or come in his sight? But if* any witness this Spirit,
and sanctification by it, thy filthy mind calls it pride. Blush for shame! Did
ever any but the Devil, minister against having the Spirit, or freedom from
siu? How art thou afraid thy fathers Kingdom should fall? Yet being told of
this, thou calls it railing, as thy forefathers would be ever in the Devils
work, but would not be called his Children; but would call God their father,
but hated all that was in his work, as thou do.

12. Query, Whether you have the same infallible Spirit as the holy men of God
had, who spoke forth the Scripture? And instead of answering plainly, thou
falls a lying again, saying, thou hears the croakings of our Papist guides; and
thou would thrust us in with them, because we say the Spirit is infallible;
and they say that their Church is infallible: so that for us to say the Spirit
of God is i^nfalible is Popery; but what Religion is thine who cannot bear it,
to say the Spirit is infallible? Where must the infallibility be, in your
Church, or in the Letter, or in you Priests? It is likest thou intends the
last: because you would bind all to believe your meanings; but when thou writes
again, deal plainly, and tell us where thou would have it, since it must not be
in the spirit. But to the Answer, thou says, the Prophets and Apostles, were
guided infallibly in the manner and matter; so that what they writ to the
Church was true; but thou have no such infallibility. I say, if thou had such a
Spirit, your Pulpits would have more truth, and thy Book not so full of lies as
it is* but will thou not call it railing, if I tell thee, that thou who have
not that Spirit, have the Spirit of the Devil? If thou do, yet the truth is no
less; for the Spirit of God is but one, and who has it, has an infallible
guide, in matter and manner if he keep to it. And he that is not guided by
this, has the Spirit of Satan, and I know that so far as any are led by the
Spirit, it guides into all truth if it be not erred from.

But says thou, I shall never like such pretenders to the Spirit. I know thou
do not; for that guide leads out of thy Kingdom. Say thou, All true
Christians are certain of their Fundamentals, yet with doubting.

Here thou have declared thy damned foundation; but true Christians know a
foundation without doubting; and thou falls to comparing us with the Pope, and
would make us like him.

I say, were it not we cry down his Worship, means; and authority, that remains
in you, we should not have so much of your malice. Are not you his dear
Children, as like as may be? Have you so soon forgot who be got you into your
Parsonages, and Masterships, and Ordained you, and your place, and form of
Worship? He is but a young Priest, who was not Consecrated by his Cathedral
Order, though now you see the Bishops your Masters are down with the
Magistrates and the people. You can talk against them, as they did against the
Pope their Master, when the Kings would own him no longer, nor they could not
be suffered to pro^ess his authority in this Nation, then they would rather
turn than fly; and have not you stuck to Episcopal Worship, till you see you
were like to be turned out, and then your wisdom would convince you of your
error.

Is not he blind that sees not you one with the Papist in the main? Its not
getting into their houses, and talking against them that can blind us, when we
see their foundation-standing; and not one thing you do, which is as the
Apostles or believers did it: But either* as the Pope and his Councels
invented, or as you have invented since in your Councels: but never came to the
Saints form, much less to the power, For shame be silent in this business;
till you have more hopes of hiding your selves, you have lost your old way of
stopping preaching and printing, and now your slandering your Popery upon other
men's backs, will but cause all to see you more plainly: people are now grown so
wise as they begin to know the tree by its fruit; your words will not serve,
your Covering grows th^n, it must be rent, and your refuge of lies are a
sweeping away, your rowing in your own filth does but cast dung in your own
faces: the truth is living and pure, and will clear it self, and all that abide
in it, but shame shall cover the wicked.

And thou calls the Ranters our brethren, but they are your brethren and
hearers, they come not amongst us, unless it be to oppose, as you do; there is
no more Communion with us and you, then light and darkness; will this cover
you who have them with you, preaching to them, and they maintaining you? nay,
its well known that there is none so bad in the Nation, but if he have but any
thing to add to your hire, you are for him, and he is one of your Church, and
brotherhood; is there either Drunkard, Swearer, or Whoremonger whatsoever, but
you will reap his Carnals, with, or against his will, and you will tell him you
sow to him spirituals, and such is your seed, and such fruits comes on it, yet
thy shameless lips will call such our brethren, when we have turned from them
for these filthinesses, and you have received them with it, nay, some of you
boast of such Converts, when we have denied them.

13. Qu. What is hells mouth that the wicked go in at? And to this thou says
it suffices thee to know that hell is a state of endless misery, where such
as we shall everlastingly bear Gods wrath. I say, that is thy desire to know?
but were thou not blind, thou would know, it is for liars, slanderers, the
man of sin, and his disciples, who plead for his Kingdom.

14 Qu. Whether the Bible be the Word of God? and Matthew, Mark, Luke and John
the Gospel? and whether there were any Gospel before them? and whether they be
the light? and to this thou gives not answer, but tells of a temporal Word; so
much knows thou of that word that endures for ever, and a word that is a sign
of Gods mind, and such confused stuff, and tells of a different sense betwixt
Christ, the Scriptures; and thou says it was written that it might be a
standing rule, and kept entire, and sure; to the worlds end; but how often have
you and your generation altered this rule? insomuch as scarce two of you can
agree about it: what is the meaning of it, and how many Copies is there of it?
which of them is the standing rule? that which stands most suitable to your
wills and pleasures, and how entire is it kept, when much of it is quite lost;
but thou might have said of it, as of the infallible Spirit, if the letter be
not it, thou have none thou knows on, that had been plainer dealing; and thou
says this word is the Light, but not as Christ is the Light, or the Spirit,
for there are many lights, and so with thy many lights thou shows thy self to
be ignorant of the one light the Scriptures speaks of, which holds out but one
light and word, but thou have many in the dark-lanthorn of thine imaginations
not one like another, and so imagines that Christ, the Spirit, and the Word are
not one, nor enlightens all alike; say thou, man's reason is the eye, and the
Gospel is external, and the Spirit clo^eth these two together, and so breeds
a spiritual illumination, which the word alone could not procure, whereas the
Scriptures witness the word, by which alone all externalls were made, and the
word for reconciling again and making new: but say thou, the word without
reason and externalls cannot produce; and this is thy word thou preaches, and
so it seems by what it produces.

And thou asks some queries, 1. Whether we believe the Scriptures be true; I
say yea, then ^ayes thou, they call themselves the word of God, and thou brings
some scriptures to prove it, but not one that says the letter is the word, and
thou brings Romans 10. 8. The word is nigh you, even in your heart, and in your
mouth; but is the Bible there: and thou brings 1 Pet. 1. 25. The word of God
endures for ever, and before called it the temporal word: Thy 2. qu. Will we
give you leave to smell the Pope, in our endeavors to d^sgrace the Scriptures
though our nose be stopped: I say, were thou not stark blind and drunck with
envy, thou might see thy own confused scornful spirit, with which thou have
discovered thy folly, who one while will have the word temporal, and another
while to endure for ever; and to prove the Bible to be the Word, brings, the
word is in the heart, but no wonder thou be blind, who says man's reason is the
eye.

15. query. Whether you own revelations or no: And to this thou says, thou
owns all divine revelations, and disowns all diabollicall ones, but in thy 10.
page, has denied revelations, but the revelations thou own is what is written,
but has not the Devil these also, yes, and can preach them as well as you, and
take them to plead for his Kingdom as well as thou, yet says thou, these are
able to make men wise to salvation, without any further additions, and when
thou have done, says, they must have the Spirit of Christ to help them; but
thou might do well to show thy opinion, whether the Spirit can make wise to
alvation without them, it seems to be thy opinion that it is not, by thy former
query, where thou asks, whether the light of Christ be sufficient; where your
Gospel is not preached, which no Gospel you have but the Letter, which if you
had it not, you would be as dumb as those which Isa^ab speaks on, and in thy
conclusion thou tells of other helps which are o^ slat necessity besides the
Spirit, and thy litterall revelations, which before thou said was sufficient to
salvation without any addition, but by thy own words, if there had been no Book
thou had had no revelation, and yet in words seems to deny thy father the Pope,
who has kept thee thy revelations, else thou had been without for ought thou
knows, yet you cannot bear it to be called ministers of the Letter, and not of
the Spirit, and the Apostles was Ministers not of the Letter but of the Spirit;
this with you is railing.

19. qu. Is about singing David's Psalms, and for answer to this thou sends us
to a Book of Cottons and Ford, and say thou knows no reason why thou should add
any more; a pretty shuffle to get shut of that thou can not prove; yet though
thou have lost thy reason to answer, thou will ask more queres, 1. If the
Scripture be written for our use, why may not we speak to God in David's words?
I say because David would not keep a liar in his house, may thou who art found
a liar, sing these words; the Scripture was not written by such a Spirit, nor
to such a spirit, nor does such learn ought by the Letter, but to cover thy
shame, and deceive others, as appears by thy practice.

2 que. They being used by the Church till the Apostles time, where was they
abolished? I say is that Church thou means on the Pharisees, such a Church uses
them now, though not so well as they did, for they did not put them into rimes
as you do, and when the Saints sung with the Spirit and with understanding, and
he that had a Psalm sung his own and not another, then was the way of
Pharisees abolished: 3. qu. Whether is it more lawful for us to sing in the
words of David, or for you to take together all the sharp reproves in
Scripture to rail on me with; I say there is as much betwixt the lawfulness of
them, as betwixt truth and a lie, for when we take Scripture language by the
same spirit that gave it forth to reprove the same deceit in thee, which Christ
and his Prophets and Apostles did in the chief Priests, Pharisees and
Hirelings, then we speak truth, though thou call it railing, but when thou and
thy hearers sings David's words, saying, you have no scornful eye; you have
rored all the day long, your bones has quaked, you have made your bed to swim
with tears, no liar shall dwell in your houses, etc. are not a nest of liars all
found lying together? and he that says otherwise of you, is a liar like you.

17. qu. What is the soul of man, etc. And thou says it is the cause of our
life, I say thou knows not him who is the cause of our life, no more then thou
do the soul, but here thou would deny God to be the cause of life, and put
the soul in his stead, as thou have denied the spirit to set the letter in his
stead, so art thou drawing downward as fast as thou can; but says thou, the
whole man in Scripture is taken for ^an the cause of life dye or be defiled?
the soul, so by thy opinion, the man is the cause of life, so thou have showed
what life thou lives, and what thou knows of the soul, yet thou will ask more
queries though resolve none; and first thou begins to wrangle with the command
of Christ that forbids thy master-hood, saying; is not many words in the
Scriptures translated master, of as* low and humble importance as ruler, I say
the words of Christ was ever in the way of the Hirelings, and Pharisees, and
Priests, and their pride, but they could not get them removed, though they was
vexed at them, and would not have them applied to them no more than thou, but
let his words alone* thou must not wrest them out of their place and power,
thou can not bow them but must bow to them, they was given to break thee and
thy pride, and not to be broken by thee nor thy teachings.

2, qu. Thou says if God bid people obey you as Rulers, and the quakers
persuade people to reject you as Serpents, etc. which is to be obeyed, God or
the quakers? and whether is the Spirit of God or of the Devil the quakers
speaks by? I say, God did never bid people obey Hirelings, and such as are out
of the Doctrine of Christ (as you a^e) but the Spirit of God called such
Serpents, and so does now, which is not the Spirit of the Devil, as the Devil
would slander it to be both Mat. 23. 33.
then and now, you being now found in the same practice, are reproved with the
same spirit.

3. qu. Thou asks, Is it the Ministers or quakers that have the rule over
people, and wait for the good of souls? I say the quakers abhors such rule as
you bear; and for the good of souls, thou must first know what the soul is
before thou can watch for the good of it, nay thou watches to destroy souls for
dishonest gain, hirelings was never souls shepherds.

4. qu. Thou says if the present Pastors be not true Ministers, tell you who
are, and where you may find them, and where they have been from Christ til now?
I say those are true ministers and ever was, who wandered to and fro, having no
certain dwelling place, of whom the world was not worthy, who ever bore witness
against the false Prophets that bear rule by their means, and the Priests that
preached for hire, and the people that loved to have it so, and whose manner
was to go into the Synagogues, and Idols temples to disprove the hirelings
false worship, and call people from them to the true shepherd; and you may
find many of these in the most prisons of the nation for so doing* by your
means, against whom we are sent to witness, and these have been banished to and
fro, (since the mystery of iniquity, and the popish priesthood was set) up into
corners, but now are come to light, to witness against the mystery of iniquity,
therefore do the heathen rage, the man of sin and all his ministers, because
his end is near.

5. qu. Thou asks if it will be for the peoples profit, to despise their
Teachers and guides? I say you who have despised Christ's commands to set up
your own lusts, and pride, covetousness, and false-worship, must be despised,
and when such guides are discovered, then shall the people profit when they come
to be guided with that spirit God has given to every man to profit withal,
which thou will keep them from as long as you can; that you may fill up your
measure, and wrath come upon you to the uttermost, being captivated by the
Devil soul and body, the God of this world having blinded the eye, so that the
Gospel 2 Cor. 4.
is hid from you, and you lost, letting up the Letter instead of it, having
denied the light, and erred from it, are got up into hardness of heart,
imprisoning, beating, and making havoc like mad beasts, what ever the Devil
did where he reigned, so do you, being the head of the Serpent, which Christ is
come to bruise, as he did in his own person so he is the same for ever to the
same brood, who now are found in the same bloody plots against the seed of God,
worse than ever any, seeking the lives of others, for practicing that in life
which your selves will preach in words for money, ^uch a generation of raging
beasts was never yet in the world, who seek to devour on every side you, and
who departs from sin is your prey, the greatest deceivers thatever yet come;
now when you come to be revealed, who would have bel^eved that you, who have
had so many millions of pounds for teaching people to forsake sin, and now* if
any declare that he has forsaken it and is set free, you preach it down as the
most dangerous error that ever was, and cry out to drunckards, swearers,
thieves and murderers, and whoremongers, come not near them least you be
deceived, and now get up more money for preaching up sin while the world*
stands, than you took for preaching it down, yet if we tell you* you are
bringing people into Covenant with the Devil for tear^ of life, you say we rail
on you when you have be got the faith of that Covenant in the whole nation, ask
any that ever believes your teaching, if they believe that Christ i^ able to
redeem them from committing sin in this world, and presently they are ready to
give an account of their faith, nay none can be free he^e, but when they are
dead in another world they shall, ^o the faith and covenant is suitable for no
less time then till men can sin no longer, and if any have broke this Covenant
through the righteous Covenant, they are ready to stone him, yet least thou
should be seen in this filth, you cast a mist before the simple, saying you
must strive after perfection and freedom, and purity, and to be set free from
sin, but once, knowing that unbelief is in the bottom, there is little danger
of freedom, for the Devil whose work you are doing, knows fulwel that if he
can but have people to believe they cannot be free, he knows they are safe with
him for ever coming at it, no faith, no obtaining, according to every man's
faith so shall it be unto them, and that striving which is not in faith to
obtain, is selfe-righteousness, but Heb. 7* 25.
who believes that Christ is able to save to the uttermost? all that come to
God by him shall see it so, but this the blind knows not, who would have
believed that these Priess that now is, had been the greatest persecutors that
ever was before them, who have preached so long against it? but say you, this
persecution of ours is not as theirs was, they persecuted Christ and such as he
sent, but these are wandrers and Vagabonds, and disturbs our peace and
worships, etc. but the light is come, your mysts will not hide you, the Sun is
risen, and you are seen in the work against the same Spirit, nothing altered
but the persons, or places, or time, where had ever ministers of Christ hand in
persecuting any upon any account whatsoever, prove your practice herein: Then
thou goes on to tell what that death is that passed upon all men, and thou
says its the separation of the soul from the body; thou blind for, did not
death pass upon Adam til soul and body was separated? this is like thy opinion
of the soul; but how can thou who art in death know what it is? those whom
Christ quickened, who were dead, E^h. 2. 1. 5. was they such who had no souls?
nay, thou must own the Light before thou know what death is, death reigns in
liars and envious ones.

18. qu. What is the Flaming Sword that keeps the Tree of Life and the
Cherubims? and this thou answers with calling it a foolish question, and adds a
lie to it, saying, we have not seen it, thou says it shall suffice thee to
know there is such a thing (which knowledge is no more in thee but hearsay) but
the sight thou puts far off into the world to come, and the Tree of Life also,
for thou that never saw the Flaming Sword and Cherubims, never came near the
Tree of Life, but as I said before, feeds upon death, thy own cursed carnal
knowledge, which God has forbidden.

19. qu. Whether they that stand praying in the Synagogues or Idols Temples,
and love greetings in Markets, and bind heavy burdens on the people, and are
called of men masters, be not out of Christ's Doctrine? and this falling upon
the head of the Serpent, being thy own practice, thou art forced to take thy
old crooked winding ways to get out, and thou begins to question instead of
answer, saying if your Temples be Christ Temples, do not we make Christ an
Idol by calling them Idols Temples? I say, they are not Christ Temples,
unless thou mean the Pope be he, whose Temples they are, who builded and
consecrated them into the names of dead men and women, and set up in them a
dead worship, all which Christ never commanded, but the Temple of Christ is
made without hands, and there he dwells, and not in Temples made with hands,
have thou a face to father those upon Christ, wherein you generation of
blood-suckers have worshipped in them ever since they was builded? do not they
stand witnesses against you, that you are the children of them who slew the
Martyrs, and now are found beating in the same SYNAGOGUES, and shedding Blood
as far as you can get the same power by which they did it, CHRIST had never
such TEMPLES, stop thy MOUTH for SHAME. And thou goes on, and where thou cannot
deny but thou art in the steps of the PHARISEES* yet says thou, I do not love
it, they loved it to be called Master, etc. but I do not; well, tho^ says in
words thou loves it not, but come to thy practice, and it will appear thou who
art but one, have made more ly^s and crooked ways to uphold it in this thy
book, then all the generations of thy fathers the Pharis^es ^i^ that ever was
before thee, and do thou think to cover all this by saying thou loves it not,
but you have used so long to lead the bl^nd, that you would put out the eyes of
them that see, and thou says it was pharisees pride that was condemned, I say
so it is your pride that is your condemantion nor can thou clear thy self of
the very same things they was found in; but least thou should lose all, yet
says thou, Christ bids them hear the hypocritical pharisees, and observe to
do as they bid you; I confess, to plead for hypocritical teachers is the
likest way to get in, to have people commanded to hear you, had not you run so
gross til you have lost all also, even the outward form of godliness which they
had, and upon that account he bad hear them, because they sat in Moses seat,
and read the Letter truly without adding, but you are neither set in Moses seat
nor Christ's, but run in your own imaginations, till neither Law, nor
Gospel-letter will warrant any one thing of your worship, matter, nor manner,
means nor maintenance, as I shall be ready to prove, that not one particular of
your worship, you act in your Idols Temples, nor wages for so doing, can you
prove by plain Scripture to be so much as in the form, commanded o^ practiced
by Christ and his Saints, and yet calls your selves upr^ght and faithful
ministers; for shame be silent as to boasting, til you acquit your selves of
this charge by plain Scriptures without wresting it; and would you have us
bound to hear such under pretense of hypocrites, who have lost both power and
show of Godliness? and says thou, it is not being called master that Christ
intended; thou lying spirit, would thou make him a liar like thee, did not he
intend as he spoke? or thou takes him to be an hypocrite like the Pharisees,
whom thou would thrust in amongst with thy consequence; and thou says he
forbids the name of fathers; I say, he forbids not children and fathers, but
such as you, then thou goes on in thy old way, lying, say^ng we forbid the
owning of any relations, and all affections and respects to them; I say thy
father has fitted thee with boldness to bring forth his work, who dare declare
thy own shame to all that know our practice, what dis-affection can thou
charge upon any of our relat^ons, unless thou accuse us because we cannot
affect the Devils pride and bow to it in such as thee?

And to plead for this mastership further thou says, thou will tell us something
we know not, and that is, that the disciples of the sect-masters of the
Pharisees, so gloryed in their masters, that they were ready to go by the ears,
and kill one another, and this thou would send us to see amongst them as a
strange business, which we see daily amongst you and your disciples, how many
Sects and Sect-masters is amongst you Priests and your Disciples, and have been
all by the ears as thou calls it, even unto blood, til you have vented all your
envy against the Lambs of Christ, as they did then, though thou would put it
far off, yet we see it here present, and say thou, these called they
Rabbis, as the Papists do the Pope, but why will thou not read on one wo^d
further, as your hearers do you, no doubt but this is as true though not so
much for thy purpose, who art hiding thy self, by accusing others; and so now,
that I have set thee in, thou may read on all the rest of thy charge against
the Pope, and find thy self guilty, and stop thy mouth, and see the Pharisees,
the Pope, and thee, and thy brethren, all on a Line, and that it is not words
we contend about, but your whole practice, which being found in and condemned,
words and meanings cannot hide you, and if the Scriptures be not right
translated as thou pleads, then is less confidence to be put in any of you who
had it in doing, yet thou says its a standing rule; thus Babylons Children are
clashing* one against another, but all against the Stone, by which we see your
fruits to be the same with the Pharisees, change the letter as often as you
will, woe to him that has no other guide and rule but that which you have so
often chopped and changed, and not still will it please you, thou may well call it
a temporal word, for you will make it serve all times, or you must want of your
wills; its no hand thing with you to take Paul's words, who wandered up and down
in hunger and nakedness, 2 Cor. 11. 27.
coveted no man's money nor gold, nor apparel, and was chargeable to none, nor
took ought against the will of the owner, etc. and with two or three
consequences and meanings from your original, you will make it prove you four
or five hundred a year, and a great house to live in, and this you will not
have by favor but force, and yet they are thieves that denies to give you
their goods when you ask it, but now when your practice and Paul's are compared,
they are as far distant as before, could you bend his life as you do his words
to your own, then might ye deceive the elect, but God has left this a rule for
ever, by their fruits shall you know them; so by your works you are so far
from Paul, that you are outrun Balaam and all the false Prophets and greedy
dogs you read on in the Scriptures, who never took it by force under pretense
of a Law, taking three for one, as you do, yet this truth which is as clear as
the Sun, must be called railing, because it falls upon your deceit, and because
a servant calls master in Scripture, says thou, why may not thou be so called,
as a minister? thou may as well say, because a servant does own his master, why
may not I break the commands of Christ? and says thou, Paul he was called a
wise master builder, I say those words will not fit thee who would build up thy
pride with them; he was Paul a Servant, and not Master Paul, if thou can own
it thou may, if not, let it alone, I say thou must be proved by thy deeds, not
with wresting his words, nor was the masters of assemblies Solomon spoke on,
such as thou, but of one shepherd, which the hirelings never knew, nor any who
would take Solomon's words to destroy Christ's commands; did thou know him thou
would not teach men to break one of the least of them, much more that which
has ever distinguished false Prophets from true, nor is there any one command
more plainly expressed, nor more faithfully obeyed by his ministers, then this
that thou art teaching men to break, it being now the great controversy with
Christ and Antichrist, who should be master, and who should be bowed to, and
how loath are his ministers to lose it, as is seen by thy crooked ways thou
takes to keep it, but thou must lose it, and the Lamb must have it, who will not
bow to thee, and Abraham, and Festus and Agrippa, cannot bear the out in
breaking Christ's command, those was not forbidden as thy practice John 5. 44.
is, who art pleading for titles of honor to you Priests as a duty; O shame
thou infidel! how can thou believe that's seek^ng for honor from men? was
ever any m^nister of Christ found in that work? and is not this the greatest
thing thou stands for in thy book? is it not seen whole honor thou art seeking
against the commands of Christ? nor is he void of the fear of God, who denies
thee to be a faithful Minister of Christ, who ministers against the command of
Christ; nor are we so so^t^sh but we can judge who is in the work of Christ,
and who is against him, with lies, saying a Minister of Christ is called
Master, and that to deny your Greek and Hebrew is to deny Christ, as though a
natural language was Christ, and thou calls some sacred languages, thou
^dolater, is not every language natural to them who are b^ed in them, is not
our English as sacred among the Greeks as theirs is here? but such as thou will
worship any thing rather then the Spirit; and after all thy lies in this book,
says we are not able to charge thee with any c^ime, but human frailt^es,
when thou art found full of gross wickedness, as in thy book is laid open, and
here thou may receive an answer to thy query, and thou boasts that thou can
talk better then we, I say thou makes it not appear in thy book, for it truth
had ordered thy tongue, I had not found so many open falsehoods and con^usions
as I have laid open already, and thou ^ayes thou would thresh, and dig, and
labor, if God would give thee leave; I say, what a God do^t thou serve which
will not allow of labor, our God condemns ^dleness, and says if any will not
work, neither should he eat; but the God of this 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10
World is the God of idleness and fullness of bread, which the Priests of this
nation have been known to serve more than any one sort of people else; and thou
says our prater is a liar, for saying if thou had no pay thou would not
preach; I say, prove him a liar, and shame him, come out and preach freely, and
then if he say so of thee, I shall say he is a liar too, but I suppose thy
Godwil not suffer thee to do this, no more than he will suffer thee to labor,
for these must go together; but let me ask the one question amongst all th^ne:
qu. The Ministers or Christ said follow us, and walk as you have us for
examples; but if* thou should say so to thine, and all the Parish masters in
this nation also, and your hearers should follow you as you do, what a nation
would here be, all idle, all proud and covetous, all live on the sweat of other
men's brews, all Masters, etc. would not this destroy relations? who would you
have to worship you? therefore take heed how you bid them sollow you, I have
heard o^ some of you (may be foreseeing part of this) have been so wise as to
say, do as I say, but not as I do, I say this is plain dealing, compared with
thee who acts all this, charges God with it, and when thou ha^t done, says we
are not able to change thee with any crime, so thou would have us to charge it
upon him who will not let the labor.

20. qu. Did ever the Lord of Heaven and Earth, or Jesus Christ, bid thee or
any of you go and preach to a people? or was any of the Apostles or Ministers
o^ Christ made Ministers by the will of man: To this thou answers after the old
way, and begins another story, telling the Lord called the Apostles by his own
voice, and le^t them to call one another to the end of the world, end to prove
this untruth thou brings, Mat. 28. 21. which Chapter has not 21. verses in,
but there is not one verse in that chapter, nor in all the book, that says
that the Apostles was to leave such an order to the end of the world, so that a
verse beyond number is fittest to quote for such a ly, but what Apostle was
that who least order with the Pope, from whom all the Parish Teachers both in
this* Nation and many more, have had their ordination and holy order, since the
Pops tieme he ^^ves from Peter, and if thou say so tool I shall not believe
you, till I see ^^tter proof than yet thou have quoted, but thou proceeds to
deny any t^ expect a call from Heaven, and the signs of thy call thou sets
down: First, thy competent qualification, yet have thou naught freely, but so
hard to study for it, that thou have no time to work* and that never was
Christ's call nor qualification: 2. Thy thirst after the good of souls, yet thou
knows not what the soul is. 3. The ordination of authorized Church officers,
what sort those are, and the rise of them, has been declared before. 4. The
call of the people and their consent over whom he has set thee; I say none
that ever was sent by Christ, ever went to ask consent of the People. 5. The
success of thy labors; but how many of thy hearers are set free from sin, yea
thy self yet a liar. 7. Some testimony of the Spirit, yet thou denies any
infallibility, and that Spirit with the Spirit of God that never erred is
denied: These seven say thou set together, are the signs of Christ's call,
and thy mission, show you the like if you can; to which I say, never any of
Christ's Ministers showed the like, nor do I neither: and thou tells the old
tail over again, that no immediate call since the Apostles, which thou never
proved yet, and thou concludes; will not all this suffice? I say those who know
not the Scriptures nor the power of God may trust thee and be sufficed with a
lie, but who knows either, sees whence thou art; was not Annanias, and
Barnabas, and others in the Scriptures, called immediately, Acts 9, 10, 11.
and with the power and Spirit by which I am called immediately, Acts 13. 2.
do I testify against thee with the Scripture.

21. qu. Whether had any Ministers of Christ an hour glass to preach by, or
took a Text, and raised Doctrine, uses, Reasons, Motives, or a carnal BELL to
call people together by, prove these things by plain SCRIPTURE, or else be
silent, and never profess your selves to be Ministers of Christ more; And to
this thou answers with telling of Spectacles, Doublet, and Breeches, and such
like vain words, but dare not compare your practice with the SAINTS in
SCRIPTVRE* thou will not be tried by thy own standing Rule, but says these are
purposely left by Christ, to be determined of humane providence, what
providence is that which is humane providence, to John 16. 13.
which your worship of God is least, is his worship humane, and your tithes
divine? they who worship in truth have the Spirit of Truth, to guide them into
all truth in his whole worship, but your humane providence, has led you out of
that worship in all things, and thou says thou can limit thy self, and not
limit the Spirit, so the spirit and thou are not one, I say I know self orders
thee, and thy times are in thy own hands, but with Christ and his it never was;
the query is of the manner of thy worship, and thou answers did the Apostles
preach in Doublets and Breeches? is Doublets and Breeches forms of Gods
worship? a man may alter Doublets and Breeches, but may he alter the form of
worship which Christ appointed? The Saints meet together says thou, and did
not stay two or three days, therefore why may not I have an Hourglass? I say
they meet together, sometimes stayed whole days* and sometimes whole nights,
as they was moved, and this did not limit the Spirit, but can you therefore set
an hour to begin and end for hundreds of years, by a glass, or by a clock
either, and not limit the Spirit? if thou knew the spirit and its moving, thou
would know to the contrary, Christ would not go to worship at his own time, nor
any that knows the Spirit, but they are ordered by it, both for time and
manner, but this the wolves never knew; thou says if thou had our spirit, thou
should be angry at the hourglass and preach the people out of their places: I
say thou art a man pleaser, who keeps an Hourglass to please the People, and a
man pleaser cannot please God, but the hireling must do his work, as may assure
him of his wages, if people set you your work, its fit that they should have it
done in their own time, and after that manner they like best, this we should
not deny you, did you not pretend ministers of Christ, but if Christ set a
work, its as much reason that he should have the like freedom to order his
workmen, seeing he never sends his to the wo^ld for counsel nor hire, this we
know, though thou do not: and thou says Christ took a Text and applied it,
and this thou would bring to prove your litterall Ministry to be the Ministry
of Christ, I say Christ took a Text and said it was fulfilled in him, but if
you take no Text but what is fulfilled in Mic. 3. 5.
you, then you must take only such as John 10. 12, 13. and those Scriptures
Mat. 23.
that tell of a Priesthood that were called of men Masters* bore Ier. 5. 31.
rule by their means, cried peace while people put into their mouths, but if
not prepared wars; that were proud and covetous, taught for flecces, beat and
cast out of Synagogues, wolves in Sheeps clothing, etc. these and such like
which sure your practice you must take, and then say this day is these
Scriptures fulfilled in your ears, and then read your portion, so take your
own, then you are no thieves; for the word of God you have not, nor was it ever
preached in your manner, nor for your ends, and your dividing is to cry peace,
though God has not spoken peace in the conscience, and are daubers, and tread
the Lambs under your feet, read Ezekiel. 22* 25. 26. and you may see what d^viders
you are, and what it is you divide.

22. qu Whether are not they that bear rule by their means and seek for their
gain from their quarter, and seek for the fleece, and make a prey on the
people, and are hirelings, be not false Prophets yea or nay? and are not such
to be cried out against now as they was then? and this being thy own condition,
thou art so wise as to let it alone without an answer, if thou had done so with
all the rest thou had kep^ thy self longer covered; thou bids us read Malachi,
so we have, and in the second Chapter, first and last, and the rest of the
Chapter, we find thy generation and thy practice, and your end coming on apace.

22. qu. Whether do you own trembling and quaking which the Scriptures witness?
and this thou looks upon to be a curse, or a papist trick, or mot^on of the
deceiver, etc. showing thy self to be one of those spoken of Is^. 66. 5. there
thou may see thy work and ours; thou Blasphemer, do thou call that a Papist
trick and the power of the devil, that all the Holy men of God that ever did
declare the way how they came to see God, came through, as the Scriptures can
witness, in Moses, David, Daniel, the Prophets and Apostles, but says thou,
perfect love casts out fear; what now! art thou talking of perfection, is it
not blasphemy to name such a word? art thou now come to perfection? thou art
well grown since thou begun thy book, wherein thou was pleading against any
possibility of perfection, but in heaven, art thou got so high now? take heed
thou deny it no more, least thou shame thy self; but its not a lie that will
make thee blush, thou have cast out that fear, but its self love that has
cast it out, for the love of God casts Psalm. 2. 11.
not out the fear of God, blessed he is that fears always, but thou art
Psalm. 72. 5.
cursed who have cast it out.

Last Quaery. Whether do you say you shall be free from the body Pro. 28. 14
of sin while you are on the earth, and whether shall any be perfect yea or nay?
and to this thou says; thou believes that in the instant of death when you
part with the flesh, you part with all the remnants of sin; I say thou have
made thy confession according to thy faith and covenant I told thee on before,
that is, you must part with your sin when you are dead and can sin no more if
you would, and the devil too; but that this Covenant of hell and death should be
for any less than term of life, that's against your faith which you have
preached, and live in, and against your Covenant too, yet if we do but say that
you are ministers of the devil and such as uphold his Kingdom of sin, while
people live, and the world tands you cannot bear it, though we do but declare
thy own con^ession. And ^or sinless perfection, thou says thou believes the
devil bred it, and thou says Christ detests it, and never man that had true
grace bel^eved it; I say, or thy says that believes the devil bred perfection,
I know thou art of that faith that ever called Christ Be^zebub, and his works
the Devil works, so in that faith I do not expect any other confession, but thy
lie thou lays upon Christ, and the Saints saying Christ's detests it, and the
Saints believed it not, I shall reprove and disprove by plain Scriptures, Mat.
5. 48. be ye perfect, even as your father which is in Heaven is perfect: Did he
command here what he detested? or was this a sinful perfection he called for?
would thou make him a liar and a dissembler like thee; and for the Saints
owning perfection, read Eqh. 4, 12, 13. Call. 1. 28. Phil. 3. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 3.
10. and 5. 2. Psalm. 18. 32. Psalm. 101. 2. H^b. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 2. 6. Iam. 1. 4.
2 Cor. 7. 1. with many more places, too many to set down here, which all
declare their belief in perfection, and thee a false witness; preaching such a
faith as never any of Gods ministers ever did, nay thou exceeds all the
hirelings and false Prophets that ever was, never any of them durst say it was
of the Devil before thee, and thou says its the Papists dongue we feed upon: O
thou blasphemer! dare thou ^peak thus of the perfection of God, which he gives
to all that wait upon him, and hunger after his righteousness, thou makes it
appear thou never knew the good and perfect gift that comes from Jude 11.
above, thou runs too greedily after gifts and rewards from below, thou have
blinded that eye that should see perfection; and says thou, the fathers
Kingdom before had perfect subjects, and so shall it have again when Christ
has perfected us; thou blind guide, had the first man Adam power to defile in
this world? and has not the second Adam power to cleanse to the uttermost in
this world what is defiled all that come to him? thou showest thy self plainly
whose power thou art under, none under the power of the Devil could ever
witness the power of Christ; stop thy mouth thou false witness, we know the
power of Christ and the virtue of his resurrection, and that he is greater in
us than he that is in the world, and that he is more able to save than the
other to destroy, to cleanse, than the other to defile; but while we believed
with thee, we knew no more of it than thou do; but with that faith which
overcomes the world and the devil, and purifies the heart, do we deny thee and
thy faith, which lies under sin and the devil, and in league with him for
term of life, and would have all so too, and thou do what thou can to
withstand, that ever the Father should have such subjects again, as he had
before the fall, never while the world stands: The last enemy (says thou) is
death, which shall then be overcome at the last resurrection, a large time art
thou taking for sin and death to reign, till all men be dead, thou art
faithful for thy God, and art making a league for him, with all that believe
thee, even for them and their children after them, til there be not a man left
to sin any more, yet must not we say thou art in the Devils work, but we must
call thee a Minister of righteousness, though thou never read of such a faith
and Ministry in all the Scripture, but thou have in this thing plainly declared
thou knows not the resurrection nor fellowship of it, art who yet in death, and
pleading for it, and to complete thy covenant of sin, least any should deny it
or break it, or sup^^t thee to be pleading for satan, thou concludes thy work
with that old refuge of the devil, that is to take the Letter which was
written to keep out of sin, and to wrest it to encourage to sin, and thou runs
to that one place which all thy Fathers children u^e to plead, 1 John 1. If we
say we have no sin, we deceive our selves; and the Truth is not in us, there
fore says thou, the truth is not in you quakers, I say John was there showing
to little children, that there could be none free from sin further then they
was in Christ, not in self, nor while any thing of self, remained, therefore
says, if we so think we deceive our selves, and though John say (we) yet was
it not his condition, but as he comes down to them to minister to their
measures who was not yet cleansed so he says, (we) whereof he was not guilty,
no more than James the Apostle was of cursing men with his Tongue, where he
says, therewith bless we God, therewith curse we men, Iam. 3 9. And many other
places of Scripture, where they come down to the condition of the weak, yet
partake of no man's sin, though such ^nclean beasts as thee would take these
Scriptures to plead for sin so long as the world stands which John wrote that
they sinned not; and thou concludes with this question, if you think you are
perfect without sin, whether do you also think that you are already in heaven,
or perfect glory; for what can keep the soul from perfect enjoyment of God but
sin, and to enjoy God perfectly, is to be glorified perfectly; but say thou,
I have forgot that your brethren think heaven hell is only with^n men; I say,
had thou forgot that lie, it had been an injury to him whom thou serves, but
I find little of that forgetfulness in thy Book, and for perfect enjoyment of
God, had not Adam in his innocence perfect enjoyment of God? and Christ in his
time when he was upon the earth, though their bodies was upon the earth, and so
far as any is covered with Gods righteousness, so far perfectly glorified, but
tho^ and thy brethren knows little of this, nor none that ever ^ought the
honor and glory of this world, the prayers of such was ever an abomination,
and their profession out of the says of Christ. Io^^ 5. 44.


Thou proceeds to ask more queries, and thou desires me to speak truly to the
point in question; I say, so I shall in plainness, passing by words to no
purpose.

And first: Thou says, are not they the very same MINISTERS you rail at,
which all the Drun^ards, Swe^rers, Whoremongers, and sensual wretches in the
COUNTRY do hate and rail at? and are not ye on their side, and p^o^^sses the
same SPIRIT, would not all covetous MALIG^ANIS have Tithes down as well as you;
were not they of the same sort of MINISTERS which the late BISHOPS silenced, is
it not then the same SPIRIT, by which you are acted?

Ans. I say railing we deny, and speak the truth against those we find out of
the Doctrine of Christ, who are one with drunkards and swearers, Whoremongers,
and sensual wretches, and whose Church and hearers is made up or many ^uch, and
who by such are upholden, maintained, and defended, who fight for such a
Ministry with clubs, and stones, and stocks, and these are of the same spirit
with them and on their side, against the servants of God, beating in their
Synagogues, and hailing out, as they ever did the ministers of truth, who was
sent to preach the Gospel, and bear witness against their false worships, whom
they raged against with carnal weapons, as they had opportunity, and for hav^ng
tithes down, they are so pla^n against the practice of the saints, by you
upholden, that they are blind that sees it not, yea good and bad, except those
who have a gain by them; and I cannot blame the enemies o^ God for wishing that
down, which is contrary to God, and for Bishops silenc^ng, I say you are in the
same work, and would silence all the appearance o^ God had you power, exceeding
all the Bishops herein, having persecuted and imprisoned more in one years
space, than the Bishops did in ten; and ^or such truths declaring, as the
Bishops would have been ashamed to have imprisoned for, yea some of you
Priests, proceeding to blood, with your own hands, being more exceedingly mad
than ever your fathers was, who would pretend a law for that which they did,
but you have none for many things you do, so you are acted by the same spirit,
but exceedingly heightened in rage, more than ever they was.

Thy second Query is made up of a bundle of lies, which I shall return thee
again from whence they came; as first: That we seduce the people from true
teaching. 2 That we contemn the Scriptures. 3. That we prefer some Translation
or Language before another. 4. That we maintain free will before conversion. 5.
Or deny it to be only the fruit of the Spirit in the Elect. 6. That we hold
forth any for the fulfilling the commands of God, but Christ only in them that
believe. 7. That we make our perfection only in casting off worldly callings,
relations, names, or any other thing, but in Christ himself, 8. or that thou
have any thing under our hands that ^aith so. 9. That we place our
righteousness in our own works. 10. That we deny the imputed righteousness of
Christ. 11. That we (instead of preaching the righteousness of Christ) we call
out for our own formal righteousness. 12. That our righteousness consists in
any outward thing or places. 13. That we say no man may call master o^ mistress
any further than Christ fo^b^ds it, to the devils pride in proud men as
pharisees, hirelings or the like. 14. That our righteousness lies in forbidding
those things. 15. That we are ignorant of Christ's righteousness. 16. That we
take the most satannical lies and slanders to be our righteousness. 17. That
the Papists and we conspire together; These seventeen devilish lies have thou
laid upon us, yet if we so call them the father of them is offended, though we
have no other name for them by the Spirit of God, which comes not to cover the
liar, but to lay him open, nor gild his works with a fine name; and thou says
thou could tell many more were it not too tedious, but if thou undertake in
plainness to prove but one of these, thou have telled it will be more tedious
than they are all in telling; and for the Papists denying your Ministry, or
confessing the sufficiency of the Light of Christ, or witnessing freedom from
sin in him, wherein (by thy confession) they come nearer to the truth in words
than you do, though as far off in practice; I say, shall we deny the Truth
because they profess it? or the light of Christ and his redemption because they
profess it in words? I say nay, nor does this prove us of the same Spirit with
them, for it is the fruits that manifests the Spirit, and not words; and by
that we deny both the Papists and you, and all that say and do not, and wherein
you say the truth, Mat. 23 3.
that we observe, but do not as you do, and so to the point, the question is
answered.

Quest. 3. Whether there were ever greater Monsters of ingratitude than these
are? who set their hearts and tongues against the Ministers of Christ, that lay
out themselves for saving of Souls, through all the scorn and opposition of all
sorts of wicked men, with whom these wretches join against them, yea and make
their very study and labor their crime, when it were much easier for us to
preach without study, and that I hope with somewhat more truth, sense, and
order, then they that so boast of the Spirit.

Ans. The sum of this query has been formerly answered, that you are not the
Ministers of Christ, neither do abide in his Doctrine, but are those with whom
these wretches they speak of join both in your worship, and to uphold you, and
that Ministry which abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, is not for saving of
Souls, nor do we make your study your crime, but your whole worship, which by
the Doctrine of Christ we deny, and for thy more sense and order which thou
boastest on, then we that boast of the Spirit, I say we have nothing else to
boast on but that Spirit that was always counted madness and disorder to thy
generation, and that's the Spirit of Truth, which with thy sense and sensual
wisdom thou reproachest, and this is the end of thy study, as appears in thy
paper.

qu. 4. Were not these faithful servants of God that suffered martyrdom under
heathen and Arian persecutors, just such Ministers as these men vill fie? or
wherein was the difference, and do not these wretches justify their murders.

Ans. I say no; nor like them, no more than the sufferer is like the
persecutor, and therein was the difference and is the difference, they suffered
in obedience to that measure of light in their times, and we suffer in
obedience to the light of Christ in these times, they suffered by the chief
Priests in their times, who had got power from the Magistrate; and we suffer by
the chief Priests who have got power from the Magistrate, and it is not the
name of Pope, Bishop, or Priest, that makes just such, or not such, but the
practice wherein they are found, and such are the servants of God, who are
found in the work of God, and such are the servants of the Devil, who are found
persecutors then, and now justi^ying their murders, who then acted ^uch.

qu, 5. Are not the Ministers who^ these men despise, of the same calling
practice as those were that suffered death in the flames in queen Maryes days,
such as Brad^^^^, H^^p^^, L^^^er, Ri^ley, Cranmore, Saunders, Philpot, and the
^e^t, were not these called Masters, did they not preach in pulpe^s, and take
tithes or money for preaching, as their due maintenance, and the other things
that the quake^s accuse us for, and do not these men just^fie the bloody
opposers of them, and condemns Gods Saints afre^h.

Ans. I say it was for denying of that which was the Popish way ^^ worship,
according to their measure of Light, that these men then suffered, and being
faithful to that measure they were excepted, though the fullness of the Light
was not then come, but this is no ground to uphold the rest of their Popish
inventions contrary to Gospel worship, and if they thus fared, who did but
witness against some branches, what may we expect, who holds forth that light
which strikes at the Root? therefore we think it not strange to see your rage
greater, if you had power, then theirs was, and it is you that justifies the
bloody opposers, and condemns the Saints afresh, as may be seen in the Goals of
the Nation, whom you have imprisoned, not having yet an opportunity for blood,
and here you are found in the practice that the popish Priests was in,
persecuting and not suffering.

qu. 6. Whether ever the earth bore men that did more proudly despise others in
comparison of themselves, and whether their language savor of the Spirit of
the Lamb of God, or can he have any taste of that Spirit of Christ in himself,
that does not even feel that their proud and railing language is of the Devil.

An. Proud and despiteful comparisons we deny, and find thee in that nature in
thy 3. qu. Wherein thou says, without study thou can preach more sense and
order, than we that boast of the Spirit, where thou compares thy sense with the
spirit, and boasts above it, neither can thou charge us with any language,
but what the Lamb used, and those that was guided by him, and thou that calls
that railing and the Language of the Devil, have no taste of the Spirit of
Christ in thee.

qu. 7. Was there ever a Generation known on the earth, that did more
arrogantly step up into the Throne of God, and sensure his servants, whose
faces they never saw, and who they can charge with nothing but being Preache^s
of the Gospel, and that in a Pulpet, having an hourglass, taking tithes, etc.
to be Ministers of the Devil, sons or Perdition, with much of the l^ke, though
Christ has said, judge not left ye be judged, and who art thou that judge
another man's servant to his own Master he stands or falls.

Ans. This Query is wholly made up of deceit, for they are not the 2 Io^n ^*
preachers of the Gospel whom we charge; neither in power nor form, but out of
the Doctrine of Christ, and the practice of his Ministers, both in maintenance
and manner of worship, who preach in pulpets with hour-glasses, and take
tithes, etc. and finding them out of the Doctrine of Christ, and practice of
his Ministers, they are declared to be the Ministers of Antichrist, and no
Servants of Christ, and so they are judged, and Christ never said judge not
such, but prescribed a rule whereby we should judge them, even by their fruits
ye shall know them* so to thy master thou art fallen, and to him thou stands
pleading for his kingdom, and in this fruit I find thee and know thee, and
with the Spirit of Christ I judge thee, though thy face I never see, and the
generation that ever judged such, was never known to the earth* though they
walked on the earth, and by the earth suffered, where^^ is arrogance that steps
up into the Throne of God, and persecutes h^^ servants.

qu. 8. Was there ever a Generation of men on whom the image ^^ the Devil was
more visible then on these, he is the Prince ^^ Darkness, Pride, and Malice,
and the depth of ignorance and height of pride and malice breaks out so
abundantly in their carriage and discourse, that all that are not utterly
blind may see it, it is the work of the devil to be an accuser of the Brethren,
and so it is the very religion and business of these wretches, to accuse
Ministers and godly people to be hypocrite liars, children of the devil,
Serpents, vipers, with much the like.

An. There was a generation of men wherein the ^mage of the devil was the Prince
of darkness, and these was they that denied the light of Christ to be
sufficient, were proud and covetous, laid heavy burdens on the people, said and
did not, professed God, but brought forth the works of the Devil, and the depth
of their ignorance, and height of pride brake out so abundantly in their
practice, that all that were not utterly blind might see it, and it was the
practice of Christ and his Ministers to declare these openly to be hypocrites,
liars, children of the devil, serpents, vipers, and much the like; and they
did not herein accuse the brethren nor Godly Ministers, nor godly people, but
such as walked contrary to God, and to speak the same words to the same
generation that* are found in the same works by the same spirit, is the same to
God, as it was then, and the same to that generation, who are found in their
works, if not, prove thou when it was changed, else thou art the accuser of the
brethren, and that falsely.

qu. 9. Is it no kind of blasphemy of the Holy Ghost, for such WRETCHES, when
they have powered out the most horrid LIES, SLANDERS, RAILINGS and false
Doctrines to profess solemnly that all this is from the Spirit of Christ within
them, and make God and his holy Spirit the pater of all.

Ans. To be found in the same practice that Christ and his Ministers (...). ^.
44.
was found in, bearing witness against the same things is no railing,
slandring, nor no false Doctrine, being done from the Spirit of Christ within
them, is no blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, but obedience to it; and in thee,
who knows not Gods holy Spirit to be the author and pattern of all, thy author
and pattern is the Devil, where God is not the Author and Father, the works
begotten and brought forth by him, such are of your father the devil, and his
works you do, this is that Spirit I told thee of before, who denies God to be
thy author and pattern, the author and fini^her of our faith and works, so must
we needs be contrary the one to the other, both in judgment and practice, as
far a Christ and Belial, as in our measures we have received him who is the
faithful witness in all Generations, against those ways you now live in.

qu. 10. Can that man that has one spark of Grace, believe that he has no
sin? etc.

Ans. I say by grace we are saved, which we have received of God which teaches
us to speak the truth, by which truth we are set free, so far as we know him,
and so far we declare our freedom, according 2 Cor. 4. 10.
to our measures, and he that sees himself set free from all sin by that Gal.
2. 20.
power, and brought wholly unto Christ, where there is no sin, selfeshame, 1
Job. 8. 5, 6.
the body of sin put off, and nothing living in him but the life of Christ, if
he declare this to his praise, he is no liar, and if such an one abide in
Christ, he sins not, neither does such an one say he has no knowledge of
Christ, nor need of the Physician, nor that he will not be beholding to him for
his blood, or to make intercession, neither does he deny that he has sinned,
but confesses to his praise who has him cleansed according to his measure, nor
is this to say he will not be beholding to God any more, who stands by faith in
his power, and is beholding to him daily, and to his blood daily, which as it
has washed so keeps pure from horrid railing, slandering, and other
wickedness, thy swearing, and drinking thou speaks on; and this is to confess
Christ come in the flesh, the just man on the earth that does good and sins
not, who is greater then Solomon, and such deny the Pharisees and Papists, and
all that justify themselves are Liars, before him, and to Heb. 7. 19.
him Solomon confessed; though the Law made not perfect, yet he does all that
come to him, and so presents them to the father, and this is Isa. 59. 19.
our standart against the enemy that would overflow us, which the hireling
knows not, whose the sheep are not, nor their pasture, who are not wretched,
nor under the power of the deceiver, which things thou would charge upon us.

qu. 11. Whether those that deny Scripture to be Gods Word, as these quakers
do, and deny that there is any such person as Jesus Christ which suffered at
Jerusalem, now glorified in Heaven, in the humane nature, and only calls somewhat
that is within themselves, by the name of Christ; I say, whether are not these
abominable infidells, having nothing to do with the name of Christians?

Ans. That we deny the person of Jesus who suffered at Jerusalem, now glorified
in Heaven in his body, is a lying slander, but thou that denies God to be the
word, and says the Letter is the Word, art ignorant both of the word and
Scriptures, as plainly they shall witness aagainst thee, which says, God is
the word, and the word of God is the Ioh. 1.
Name of Jesus, as the Scripture declares, but never takes that name Rev. 19.
11.
to its self; And the word of God endures for ever: and this is the word 1
Pet. 1. 25.
which by the Gospel is preached, which is not the Letter; and thou that
know not the Letter within thee, art the Infidel and Reprobate 2 Cor. 13. 5.
thou speaks on, who has nothing to do with the name of a Christian, who art
adding thy lies and slanders, as though only we limited Christ within us,
because we witness him in us, so with the Scripture thou art proved to be
ignorant of them, and the power of God; from which they were written.

qu. 12. Is it not damnable hypocrisy in the wretches to prate so much of
Scripture, and call for Scripture, while they thus deny it to be Gods word?

Ans* In this query thou shows thy confusion, one while charging us to prate
too much of Scriptures, and call for Scriptures, and yet thy end is to make
people believe that we deny Scriptures because we will not own the Scriptures
by the name of Christ, who is called the word of God, and in thy seeking
occasion to slander, but can find none; thou shows thy damnable hypocrisy and
wretchedness, and denies both the Word and Scripture.

que. 13. Is it not damnable hypocrisy in them to call themselves Christians,
when they are infidells, and deny the person of Christ crucified to be in
Heaven?

Ans. It is damnable hypocrisy and wickedness for thee to continue thylying,
saying that we deny the person of Christ cruc^fied to be in 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Heaven, and thou thy self art the infidel, who cannot believe Jesus Christ in
the Saints, but calls it a thing within us, but can not own it by the name of
Christ, as in thy 11* query, and that faith is Reprobate, Ioh. 5. 10.
and thou that knows not Christ in thee art the Infidel, for he that believes
has the witness in himself.

qu. 14. Is not he a Pagan and no christian, that thinks that the Light which
is in all the Indians, Americans, and other Pagans on earth, is sufficient
without Scripture?

Ans. I say that Light which the Gentiles had, which brought them to do the
things contained in the Law, showing the work of the Law Romans 2.
written intheir hearts, was sufficient without the circumcision of the Letter,
which the Jews stood so much on, yet brought not forth the same fruits which
God accepted, though they could call them Heathens and Gentiles, as thou do
the Indians and Pagans, but it the Indeans and Pagans own that Law written in
their heart, and come to receive power to bring forth the fruits of it, which
thou do not; I shall say of you both as Paul did of the Jews, Romans 2. 12, 13,
etc. not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified; but art not thou a Pagan, if not worse, who would conclude
all in condemnation, but who comes to hear you hirelings, and your expositions
of the Scriptures? nay thou art a blasphemer, above all thou read on in the
scripture, who would make the light of Christ (wherewith he has enlightened
every one that comes into the world) to be insufficient without scripture, and
so condemn all the Saints and their sufficiency, before the Letter was, and so
Ioh 1*
destroy Abraham's faith and sufficiency, which had no Letter to add to it, but
this is all thou knows of it or its foundation, who denies its sufficiency.

qu. 15. Was that Light in Paul which persuaded him that he ought to do many
things against the name of Jesus, sufficient to convert him to the faith of
Jesus? or did Christ give him needlessly a light from heaven, and by Ananias his
Doctrine? or had Cornelius sufficient Light within him before Peter preached
unto him? or had all the world sufficient Light within them, before Christ sent
abroad his Apostles to preach the Gospel unto them? or did Christ send them a
needless light by his Apostles? have those persecutors sufficient light within
them to cause them to believe in Christ, who think they do God service in
killing or reproaching his ministers and people?

Ans. I say Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the World, which
Ball, and thou, and many of thy generation, being exceedingly mad, with envy
and rage, running in your own wills, and acting against it, your light is
become Darkness, and so great is that darkness, that you are reproaching,
persecuting, and killing the people of God now, as he was then, and think you
do God service, yet is the Light in Darkness, though Darkness comprehends it
not; Io^n 1. 5.
and therefore Peter was sent to Cornelius, Ananias, to Paul, and the Apostles
to the world, not to give them eyes, but to open the blind eyes, and to turn
them from Darkness to the Light, as is plain, Christ and the Apostles came into
the world for that purpose, though Christ was the light before the world was,
yet came into the world to open the eyes, Isa. 46 6, 7. and sent his Apostles
to that end, at is plain Act. 26. i7, i8 and to the Light that shun in
Darkness was they to turn 2 Pet. 1. 19.
them, and this was the way by which they knew God, to which they confessed, as
is plain in the Stripture, til which time the Gospel was hid, and the CREATURE
lost by reason of that DARKNESS, wherewith the Prince of this World had their
hearts blinded, 2 Cor. 4. 3. to the 8. ver. and this Light did not persuade
Paul to be a persecuter, nor thee neither, but the Prince of Darkness which
has thee blinded, wherein thou appears to be one of those builders who refuses
the Corner Stone, and denies Gods covenant, which Isa. 42. 6.
was a covenant of Light, and not of the Letter, and the Law written in the
heart, and not in the Tables, which the carnal eye sees not, nor Mat. 24. 23.
26
thy wilful mind regards not* who art crying, lo here, lo there without thee,
but says Christ, go not forth, the word is nigh thee in thy Romans 10. 8.
heart, and that word of faith the Apostles preached, which was in peoples
hearts, but such was not Ministers of the Letter but of the Spirit, nor did
ever say the Letter was the Word, as thou do, but if the Letter be not the
Word, it seems thou has none of the Word, but art one of those who says, hear
the word of the Lord, when the Ier. 23.
Lord never spoke to thee, but has stolen it from thy neighbor which is none of
the word of the Lord to thee, so thou perverts it, taking the Scriptures to
plead for sin which was written against sin, which they that had the word of
the Lord never did, and that Light which thou deniest to us, is become the head
of the corner, and we witness it sufficient without any other addittion, but
thy testimony of it is the testimony of an unbeliever, contrary to what Christ
commands, thereby to be become the children of light; there is the covenant
and the promise of it, John 12. 36. John 8. 12. and out of the Light, there is no
promise, and all that thou have here proved is but thy self a child of
Darkness, and no otherwise to be believed, so brings forth thy deeds of
Darkness, speaking evil of that thou know not, and none can own Ananias
Doctrine Act. 9. 10. 11.
who denies immediate callings.

qu. 16. If all have sufficient Light within them, what need you go up and down
to persuade them, is it needless Light that you bring them, or is it hellish
darkness?

Ans. We are sent to declare that Light which is sufficient, which we witness
within us, and to draw people from that hellish darkness into which the blind
guides have led them, and from all the dark worshipps set up in the
imaginations unto the light of life, which is only sufficient; which bears
witness in them against all the Deeds of Darkness, showing what is to be
reproved and what is wrought in God, Ephesians. 5. 13. John 3. 21. so to turn people
John 16. 13.
to that Light and Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth, is the end of
our Teaching, and the enemy of hellish Darkness, and that Spirit is in them,
and they shall know it who turn to it.

qu. 17. Is it not a most sottish trick of you to go up and down prating and
commanding, and yet refuse to show your commission *from God, and to call
Ministers to show theirs and refuse to show your own, but say it is invisible
within you, are you so mad to expect that any should believe an invisible and
indemonstrable COMMISSION, and might not we as well we tell you ours is
invisible, but that indeed it is not, or should we believe every one that
prates of a commission within him or no? if not, why should we believe you more
than others that say the like?

Ans. Our call and commission is invisible as to you, as ever it was to the
world, yet herein is it showed that we are found in the same practice and
suffering, that all the Saints of God ever was, for declaring against the false
worships, and this we refuse not to show in the midst of your envy, in the
patience of Christ and his long suffering, in the midst of your bloody
persecution, and here is your commission showed also, and from whom you have
it, even him that is within you who is known by his fruits outward, a murderer
from the beginning so is the Spirit of God by its fruits outward, a sufferer
from the beginning, so each tree is known by its fruit, whatsoever you tell us,
and that's the sot which cannot see it nor believe it.

qu. 18. Seeing you cry down our Ministry and Churches, tell us which is the
the true ministry and Church, and when yours begun? and where it has been
since Christ's abode on earth til now? speak plainly and let us know, whether
you indeed are Papists or Pagans?

Ans. The true Ministry and Church is those who abide in the doctrine of
Christ, guided by his Spirit, in the way of his worship, and this Church begun
to be separated from the world, first in Abell, and since Christ's abode on the
earth has been thrust into corners, persecuted and imprisoned, and killed by
Cains generation, who was ever worshippers yet in their murderous nature, and
here we speak plainly such was Pagans and Papists, though they called
themselves Catholics, the same are you now, who are found in the same works,
though you call your selves christians, and such churches we cry down, and
their ministry, who has their hands in blood and persecution, whatsoever they
are called by; and now that we have spoken plainly and truth also, see thou be
not angry and call trailing, and plot mischief against us in secret, as your
father Cain did and all his generation, when you cannot do it openly.

qu. 19. Is not that man an infidel and a scorner of Christ that dare say he
came into the world and shed his blood to gather only a few raging quakers ^n
England. 1652 years after his incarnat^on, if Christ have no subjects but
these, he is a poor King; ^f Christ have been t^ll now without subjects, he
was no King, if without a Body, he was no Head, if without a spouse, he was no
husband; Therefore show us what a church Christ had, or confess your selves
infidels.

Ans. The nearest comparison as I find in Scripture whereby to show what a
Church Christ had, since the mystery of iniquity, and Popish Priesthood, and
Parish Masters, was set up in the ^ailing away, may be compared to his Church,
from the time that the hirelings and false Prophets begun amongst the Jews to
preach for hire, and bear rule by their means, etc. even til Christ's coming in
the flesh, which Church was sometimes visible, but ^n a few d^spised Prophets,
who were sent one after another, to cry down the false worships and covetous
practices, and to testify of his coming, which alwai^s suff^red by the
multitude o^ Priests and sal^e Prophets, who when they came still conspired
against him, and if thou look back since your lordly authority was set up in
your Ministry, you may see they have had their hands in the like practice
against those who lived in hope of his appearance, denying their worships, and
now it is ^alne into your hands, who are garnishing their Sepulchers, crying
out against your fathers, the Popes, and the Bishops, for their cruelty, but
are found deeper in it to your power than ever they was, scarcely ever ceasing
to stir any authority of the nation against the Lamb, and his Light where it is
made manifest; yea many of your Generation not finding the Magistrate so ready
to execute your bloody designs, as you would have them, have shed blood with
your own hands, even of the innocent, and they are not a few that are guilty
hereof, in the north parts of this Nation, and the kingdom of Christ has been
poor according to thy judgment, yet has these been his subjects; nor has he
been without a body, nor without a spouse, so thou may read what a Church
Christ has, and what a Church he has had formerly, yet is he not come to save
a few raging quakers only, but with ten thousand of his saints is he come to be
avenged of that bloody Generation: and for the Infidel thou tells on, and the
scorner of Christ, that is he that cannot believe in him, and his Light to be
sufficient: and what a church Christ has had and has, we have showed.

qu. 20. Did not the spirit of the Quakers speak in numbers 16. 3. just as you
do now against magistrates, and ministers, and is not God very patient that
causes not the earth to open and swallow you up quick, as it did them? do you
understand that the Simonians (or disciples of Simon Magus) and the
Nicholaitans, whose Doctrine and deeds Christ hates, Rev. 2. and other
gnostick heriticks in the Apostles days did deal by them and the Church then
as you do by us now; and that the second Epistle of Peter, the Epistle of Jude,
much of the first of John, and the second of John, were written purposely
against them, besides many other Scriptures, and have you well considered those
Scriptures, and applied them to your selves?

Ans. That Spirit of Christ we own, is that meek Spirit that* was in Moses,
against which the Rebellious Levites was then gathered, who would condemn it of
too much purity, saying that all the congregation was holy, the same which you
do now, calling all Christians, and sprinkl^ng their Children under the name of
believers, and that Spirit which we own, speaks not against Magistracy nor
Ministry, such as are appointed by God, though it has ever testified against
the corruption of that Magistracy which by God was appointed, yet can not
thou here shelter thy self, who art out of the Doctrine of Christ in all thy
Ministry, and was never called by him, and thy spirit we understand to be worse
than Simon*Magus, for he believed in the Light of the Gospel, but thou denyest
it, and he would have bought the gift which thou would sell if thou had it,
neither had he a hand in such works of envy against the Truth, as thou and thy
generation are found in, though there then was heriticks, who dealt with the
Apostlesthen, as you do with us now, and those was and are the heriticks who
abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, who are proud and covetous, cannot cease
from sin, have hearts exercised in wicked practices, after Cain and Balaam, and
of these did Peter and Jude speak of in their Epistles, 1 John 4. 2, 3
and John also, who declared that then Antichrist was gone into the i John 5.
9, i0.
World, and that was the Spirit of Antichrist who denied Christ in them, but
they that believe has the witness in themselves, and they that abode not in
the Doctrine of Christ, and had the Father and 2 John 9. 10,
the Son, they was not to receive them into their houses, neither bid them God
speed, and would thou be found in these practices, and have us to apply these
Scriptures to us, who deny those practices; thou can not hide thy self here,
when thou finds us in those things, apply thou those Scriptures unto us; in the
mean time, take thy portion from them, being condemned by them, and we have
considered those Scriptures, and find them written against thy generation and
your practice and so we apply them unto you.

And for the clearer manifesting what Gospel and faith thou Preaches, I shall
lay down these queries following, they being that which every true Minister
knows, and very needful to be known to all people.
FIrst, Has the first Adam power upon earth to defile all that are in him, and
has not the second as much power and virtue to cleanse from all sin all that
are in him? if so, then what is the cause men must commit sin and be imperfect
while they live in this world?

2. Whether is that new birth spoken on (without which none can be saved)
Christ formed in believers, or only a believing that he was manifest in the
flesh, 1655* years since, and has not the Devil and reprobates this belief
latter mentioned.

3. Has any life eternal in them, but who has the flesh and blood of Christ
in them? and is life eternal known any other way savingly in this world while
people live?

4. Is any the Sons of God further then they are guided by the Spirit of God in
all things? and is not the Spirit of God a sufficient guide to all who have it
in all things, without any other help according to the measure received.

5. Whether the Spirit of God in them who have it (according to its measure) be
not the absolute Judge of all Spirits, the opener of all Scriptures? and
whether needs it any visible thing to add to it, or can any other thing judge
it.

6. Whether can any other Spirits judge of Scripture, or any of the works of
God aright, but wrests Scripture to the destruction of creatures, and calls
light darkness, and darkness light, and can any other spirit judge according to
God in any thing?

7. Whether the Word of God can be changed, or can it admit of several
meanings, as to one particular thing? is it visible or invisible, ^^r is there
any word but one, and whether was that word before the letter, and shall be
when the letter is turned to dust?

8. Whether is the least measure of saving faith present power against the
greatest power of darkness, and able to keep out of all sin whatsoever, if the
creature abide in it.

9. Whether ever any Minister of Christ had any hand in imprisoning any man for
coming into their meeting places; or was any beat in the meeting places where a
Minister of Christ was preacher, and was it not the manner of the Apostles to
reason and dispute in the Synagogues against their false worship, and was not
all persecutors and fighters against God, who opposed them, and is it not the
same now where the same Spirits are, and is that the Spirit of God or of the
Devil which says its no more persecution to put such in prison, than to burn a
thief in the hand, as thou do?

10. Where that temple of God is where the man of sins sits, showing himself
that he is God, and must not the Light of Israel reveal him first where he is,
and then bind him and cast him out, and when he is cast out, whether is not
the body of sin wholly put off, yea or nay? or can he return in again unless
the creatures mind go out to his temtations first, and do not such depart out
of the covenant of life and faith, and so make shipwreck of the good conscience?

11. Whether is the light of Christ Spiritual, or can it be known any other
way but in Spirit within, and is not the light of Christ within the absolute
way out of death and darkness, or does it stand need of any temporal thing to
help it to enlighten those who are turned to it, believe in it and love it?

12. Whether is the Gospel Ministry the same it was in the Apostles times, both
for matter and manner, means and maintenance? if nor, when was it changed (and
by whom) into Steeplehouses, Tithes and great Parsonages, and that order of
worship now used, seeing* you are erred out of the way of the Apostles in every
particular of your worship.

13. Whether may not the Spirit of God (in whom it is) use the same words
against false teachers now, as it former has done against them that was found
in the same practice? and is there any plainer trial of these two Spirits in
this world the^ by their fruits herein, as is found in Scripture; and is it now
any more railing and bla^p^emy than it was then, or by what name m^^t a lie be
called according to Scripture and the practice of Christ?

These queries I have not put forth to keep up strife, but being things much
contended about with many, if thou in plainness give an account o^ thy faith
herein, the difference may be known betwixt us and you Priests, Teachers, and
whether of us owns the Saints practice as is declared in Scripture* but if thou
fold them up by six together, and send us to a book to seek an answer we know
not where, as thou d^dst in thy last book, or if thou answer them with
sleighting and shuffling when thou come to the Thing intended, as thou have
done, thou will be seen, and thy cover will discover thee to all the children of
light.

FINIS.

