E-Libris-F.F-Proed-de-Woodchester:


IHS

Ant. Wierx fecit. et. exend.

Angele qui meus es custos pietate superiu^.
Me tibi commissum serua defend au^berna.
Vt valeam tecum caelestia scandere regna:
Angele sancte Dei sit tibi cura mei.


THE Daily exercises of a Christian life OR The interior spirit with which we
ought to animate our actions throughout the whole day. WITH An easy instruction
for mental prayer, Translated out of French by I. W. of the Soc. of JESUS.

The 2. Edition with several additions by the Author.

Printed at S. OMERS by LUDOVICUS CARLIER in the year 1689.

By Permission of Superiors.

TO THE QUEEN
MADAM
I First published this treatise for the comfort of English Catholics then
groaning under a severe persecution for their Religion, whilst their false
accusers pretended they suffered for designing the destruction of the late
King, but now manifest the severity showed against them was not out of a motive
of Loyalty or affection to his Majesty, but out of hatred to the Catholic
Religion: since at present they commit greater treasons against our sovereign,
than they accuse the Catholics to have designed against his Brother: and this
for no other reason but because he professes and consequently favors that
Religion they aim to destroy, and now endeavor to depose him, because he will
not permit them to ruin the same.

I now publish this second Edition with several additions made by the same
Author, whom since your Maiesty's arrival in France you have both heard and
approved, and presume to dedicate it to your Majesty, whose sufferings in this
second persecution as much exceed what Catholics underwent in the former, as
your condition does exceed theirs; hoping you may find such a proportionable
comfort by the perusal of it, as several have owned they experienced: and
since your Majesty's constant piety prompts you to a daily Exercise of solid
virtue, these daily Exercises will assist you to an easy performance of your
Majestys design; and tho your courageous suffering such a change of fortune,
shows to how high a pitch of solid virtue you are already arrived, yet you
will here find how large and pleasant a field virtue is that leads to that
Kingdom prepared as a reward for your sufferings not subject to such
vicissitudes as you have experienced these earthly Kingdoms are; and that your
Majesty after a long and happy Reign with our King here, may arrive to the
enjoyment of this everlasting Kingdom hereafter, are the hearty wishes and
constant prayers of

MADAM Your Majesty's Most humble and most obedient Subject and Servant J. W.

A PREFACE. To English Catholics.
LIGHTING accidentally upon the ensuing Treatise, I was so pleased with its
solidity, facility and brevity that I was moved to translate it for your use
and profit (especially for such as understand not french) whose present
sufferings must needs give you a sight of the vanity and inconstancy of this
world, and move you to seek a more secure, solid, and lasting happiness in the
next, whereunto the instructions you will here meet with, will easily and
securely lead you: For such well disposed persons as you are, this Treatise was
writ, and for such also I translated it: who having undergon the sharp trials
of long and severe persecutions, are trained up and fitted for a greater
combat: where you are to become your own adversaries, and are to engage with no
other enemies then your selves; which I call a greater combat, because a
greater courage and constancy is required thereunto: for one blow is sufficient
to crown a martyr, whereas a war with yourselves is to endure as many years as
you live: perhaps not so bloody and cruel as the other, but yet more irksom and
vexatious, where you may overcome but can never have truce or peace: so much
harder is it to live a martyr, then to die one, and more crowns are due when
you die oftener and only live to add new crowns by dying daily. This is a
combat common to all Christians, to all states and conditions, whilst the other
has been the happy lot only of a few: this reaps a harvest of merits in the
toilsome and laborious field of virtue, whilst the other is a free gift and
favor bestowed sometimes on the greatest sinners. Happy therefore and thrice
happy are you, who are both chosen out for followers of the cross and also
continue to follow it by your own free will and election, not like those faint
hearts who understand not this happiness, but turning their backs to glory, do
comply so much with ease and terrene inclinations, as to shrink out of the
lists, and decline this hard and toilsome enterprise: but eouragiously treading
that rough yet only secure path to happiness by which the Eternal Father led
his beloved son. Oportebat Christum pati and sic intrare in gloriam are by
so happy a necessity of suffering disposed to such admirable sentiments as
this treatis will help you to practis, which therefore I hope will be the more
acceptable to you: who I am sure are so far from shunning the difficulties you
will meet with in the exercises here prescribed, that you will rather take them
for the first copies set to beginners, and for easy draughts delineating only
the first grounds and out lines of perfection: whereby you being daily improved
and allured to so happy and profitable an enterprise, will generously offer at
more and greater; and for the present, make it your delight to read a
spiritual book, to be sometimes retired, and to absent and often withdraw your
selves from worldly conversation, to converse with God, and become more present
to him and your selves; to resist corrupted nature, and follow Christ in the
way of the cross and mortification, and hereby become and continue such true
pretenders to heaven, as I either take you or heartily wish you to be; and that
I may be one of that happy number, and become joint parraker of what we all
pretend to, everlasting happiness; I humbly beg the assistance of your good
prayers.

THE PREFACE. Of the necessity of performing our actions well, in order to
perfection.
YOu will not find here either studied discourses or elevated conceits touching
the interior and hidden life, and the virtues which it forms in us; there are
spiritual books enough which give it is maxims, teach it is secrets, and
discover it is illusions; here are only plain reflections upon our ordinary
actions teaching with what spirit they ought to be animated; however I dare
affirm that these practices are no less profitable to good souls than all
those high and sublime rules which are given them, of the several degrees of
prayer, and interior abnegation; for we want not so much knowledge and
instruction as the execution and practice thereof; we are sufficiently
instructed in this age in all spiritual matters, but our misery consists in
this, that we content our selves with the bare knowledge out of books that
treat of them, and, it may be with speaKing thereof in conversation; and if
sometimes it happens that we find some relish of these truths, or penetrate a
little deeper then ordinary into them; we look on our selves as already great
proficients in spirit, and rest there without passing on to any practice
thereof. It Is enough at present for a devout person to have by him the Treatise
called the Interior Christian, and now and then to read in it, to believe
himself a very spiritual person much advanced in perfection. We see many souls
much addicted to read the latter end of this book, where it treats of the most
high and sublime degrees of prayer: but we see very few who exercise themselves
in the practice of the love of contempt, mortification, and suffering, whereof
the Author treats in the beginning. For my part, I am persuaded that we have
more need of having our hearts touched, then our minds enlightened, and that we
stand more in need to be animated to practice what is good, then to have bare
desires of it. wherefore I thought it very profitable to instruct good and
devout souls how to perform all their exterior actions with an interior
spirit, and not to follow their own humor, custom or sensuality, but to
render their actions (as I may say) full of god, and to animate them with the
spirit of his grace. In effect all who know what belongs to true devotion and
christian perfection, agree that it consists in doing the will of god, and that
in such manner as he will have it done: and that this is the sanctity to which
god calls all christians of what condition soever. Now it is in the ordinary
actions, which every one in his state performs, that the will of god is marked
out to us, and therefore all our perfection consists in doing them well. All
persons are not capable of high and elevated prayer, and if they be not called
to it, they will not at the day of Judgment be accountable for it, wherefore
it is not necessary to them to Know the several degrees of prayer, and all that
is got by such notions, is either vanity, if they flatter themselves with a
belief that they are carried by those sublime ways: or else discouragement, if
they find themselves incapable of them: but there are none of how mean a
capacity soever they be, who are not able to perform their actions with an
interior spirit, and therefore it is not only profitable, but necessary to Know
how to animate them with it: because we shall be examined and judged upon this
point, and the first head of our examination will be, whether we have acted as
christians, and not as Pagans, or barely as men?

I add that it is very hard to very many souls to penetrate, or even to
conceive the great maxims of abnegation, of relinquishing all humane things,
of interior silence, of the passive state, of the death to all that is
sensible, of the loss and consummation of a soul in god. But there is no soul,
how little soever it be enlightened by god, which may not easily learn to
perform these ordinary actions with christian sentiments; and regulate the
conduct of it is life according to the maxims of the Gospel: wherefore I here
lay down an easy way, or method, whereby all devout and christian souls may
arrive to an eminent degree of virtue, fulfill the perfection of their state,
please god in all things they do, act in all things according to the spirit of
grace, and not according to the sentiments of nature, gather together in a
short time great treasures of merits, fly not only idleness the ordinary fault
of the world, but the unprofitable passing of their life, the common error
even of virtuous persons, perform from morning to night the will of god,
without straying one moment from this way, become (as David was) persons
according to gods own heart, and in fine render themselves by an exact
fidelity, very great Saints: and this by doing nothing else but their ordinary
daily actions. For my part, when I consider that god has annexed our perfection
to the exact performance of our daily actions, that it is of these he will
require an account at the day of judgment, that it is to animate us to perform
these that he gives us his graces, and that when we have any one of them to do,
all that he requires of us, is nothing but our fidelity in performing it; I am
surprised to see so few apply themselves to a holy and exact performance of
them; and that they seek virtue and perfection in things which god requires not
at their hands. Let us therefore endeavor to make a firm resolution to do all
our ordinary actions of the day well, and place our perfection in this
practice; let us avoid all things in them which may be displeasing to god, and
take care to omit nothing in their performance which may be pleasing to him;
let us perform them after such a manner, as that god may be the soul of all our
actions and endeavors, and that there may be nothing human or unprofitable in
all that we do, so that we may never be one moment without meriting and tending
toward god; that Jesus Christ may live in us, as the Apostle says, and that
the spirit of his grace may animate all our thoughts, all our words, and all
our works. I know very well that souls who are after an extraordinary manner
carried to prayer, ought not to tie themselves to particular motives or
reflections for the right performance of their actions, and that they ought to
content themselves in following with fidelity the impulse of gods grace, and to
suffer themselves to be led to the performance of them by the spirit which
animates them, and which will make them avoid the imperfections which are
ordinarily committed in such performances even when they do not foresee them:
But since there are very few such souls, and that they as well as others will
be able to find in the advice that I give, the sources of retirement and
recollection, that is to say, such thoughts as will maKe them enter into
themselves even in the midst of their distractive Employments, there are
therefore few persons, or to say better, none, who may not reap profit out of
these exercises. But that they may be able to do so, I would council them to
read them often, till such time as having so fixed in their minds all these
sentiments, they may upon all occasions use them as a rule whereby to perform
all their actions in an holy manner, and it would be good also to run them over
at the end of the weeK or month, thereby to discover and taKe a view of all
their faults. In the beginning they may also content themselves with the
practice of the rules relating to the performance of some particular action, as
of Mass, for example, and afterward endeavor to perfect themselves in the
rest. For I cannot but affirm* that we have not any means more sure, easy, and
efficacious, of making our selves Saints, and arriving to an eminent degree of
virtue, then by doing all our actions with an interior spirit: this is that we
ought to apply our selves to, all the days of our life, and we may assure our
selves that to die in this exercise, is to die the death of Saints.

THE Daily exercises of a Christian life OR The interior Spirit with which we
ought to animate our actions all the day long.
I. RISING.
THE holiness of life and death depending on our passing over the day in an
holy manner, and the passing of it well consisting chiefly in a good beginning
of it* I dare affirm that the action which one ought to perform with the
greatest fervor, is that of rising in the morning, wherefore taKe care to rise
every day at a constant and regulated hour, and if you find any difficulty in
it, think of Jesus Christ hanging upon his cross, to which the love of you
fixed him, much faster then the nails; from whence he reproaches you with your
delicacy and sloth* and you will be ashamed to give this ease to your body,
seeing your saviors body torn, and his blood exhausted for the love of you.
You may also sometimes, if you please, think of that which a soul in Purgatory
suffers for the sloth it had in rising, whilst it lived and entertaining your
self with these good thoughts, get up with fervor, having first consecrated to
god your heart and soul, and put him into possession of your self. You may rise
ordinarily in Summer at five of the clock, and at six in the winter. When you
are up the first thing you are to perform, is prayer, which consists chiefly in
four acts. By the first, you adore God as present, and give him thanKs for
having had the goodness to preserve you that night from sudden death. By the
second you offer to him all your thoughts, words, and deeds, and all your
sufferings together with your self, in union with the thoughts, words, deeds,
and sufferings of Jesus Christ, praying him to act in you, and to animate you
to suffer, and to Keep you all that day intimately united to him by a faithful
imitation of his life in all that you do. By the third act you asK pardon of
God for your past sins, making a firm resolution of avoiding all mortal and
venial sin and particularly to take tcare of that imperfection you find your
self most subject to, and to practice that virtue which you have undertaken
that month to practice: asking for this end, the assistance of that Saint whom
you have for your patron and protector. By the fourth act you must commit and
resign your self first to the bounty and goodness of God, in order to all the
graces which he shall please to bestow that day upon you, then to his Justice
in order to all the pains and afflictions which he shall please to send you,
welcoming them as from his hand, and accepting them with resignation, and
lastly to his providence in order to all the good and bad success which he
shall permit, in what you undertaKe or perform. After these Acts, say a Pater,
Ave and Creed together with the Confiteor and if you please, the Litanies of
Jesus, and three times Gloria Patri, etc. in honor of the blessed Trinity. In
fine, pray to the blessed Virgin, your good Angel, and Patron, to assist and
preserve you, and offer up the Masses that shall be said that day throughout
the whole world, to obtain of God fidelity to concur with his grace, as also
an happy death.

II. DRESSING.
HAlf an hour past five or past six (according to the time of your rising)
dress your self; (1.) with modesty, and without any satisfaction or complacence
in your clothes, remembering that God looks upon you, and that this body you
take so much pains to dress and adorn, may perhaps the same day become the food
of worms: consider also that Jesus Christ would die naKed upon the cross to
satisfy for the vanity which we take in our clothes, and to punish it in
himself. (2.) It will be also good to divest your self of this vanity, and
gratefully to acknowledge the goodness of your dying Jesus, in reducing himself
to this poor condition for your sake, by depriving your self from time to time
of some little ornament that pleases you most, tho it were but of a riband,
which you may sacrifice unto him, or you may forbear to wear that day some
better suit of clothes or gown, for his sake; all which will be very pleasing
to him. (3.) Above all, look not in your glass but for mere necessity, that so
you may avoid such satisfactions and complacences as may happen in that action;
consider that your soul is as disagreable in the sight of god, and as naKed of
the ornaments of virtue, as your dressings and ornaments are agreeable in your
own. (4.^ Employ no more time in dressing then is purely necessary, remembering
that you must give an account to god for the time unnecessarily spent in it.
After this, give order for such things as are to be done about your house.

III. PRAYER.
AT seven of the clock, or half an hour past it, (according to the time
necessarily required for your dressing and ordering the affairs of your
household) maKe your prayer for the space of half an hour, retiring your self in
to a Closet, if you are not alone in your chamber, or if you cannot perform it
with convenient recollection at home, you may go to the Church; but it would be
much more to the purpose to maKe it before you quite dress your self, if you
maKe it at home. In prayer, follow the advice of your directour, without
consulting others, and above all, remember to observe three things, first,
often to renew the presence of God, and sweetly and familiarly entertain your
self with him concerning the truths you meditate of, to the end you may always
remain with due respect, and more easily avoid distractions; Secondly receive
with patience such aridities, disgusts, distractions, or wanderings of the
imagination, as God permits to happen to you in prayer, looking on this as the
best way to profit much in a short time in the pure love of god, which is so
remote from whatsoever is sensible: Moreover in this condition you ought to do
nothing else save only (1) to humble and annihilate your self before the
divine Majesty of God, looKing on your self as unworthy to speaK unto him. (2.)
offer up your disabilities and weaKnesses to God; resigning your self to his
will, and protesting that you seeK or desire nothing but purely to please him.
(3.) raise your self by frequent elevations of your heart to God, and chiefly
by acts of faith, hope, charity, humility and resignation, not troubling your
self if you do not this with sweetness or facility and being thoroughly
persuaded, that the more violence you use toward your self, the more pleasing
you are to Almighty God. (^.) in fine, you ought in this condition, to continue
on your Knees with fidelity, during the whole time of your prayer, (unless you
are hindered by indisposition) detaining your self in a posture full of respect,
and as a victime sacrificed as well to the power of a God, whom you honor by
executing his will, in spite of the difficulty you find in it, as to his
justice, which you glorify by suffering, either the proof he makes of your
fidelity, or the pain wherewith he punishes your past unfaithfulness* The
third thing to be observed in prayer is, to make particular purposes and
resolutions, as for example, to overcome your inclinations and humors, to
renounce your own will, to mortify your senses, to humble, moderate, and
recollect your (...) such and such occasions. In con^usion, you ought to offer
your good purposes and resolutions to Jesus Christ by the hands of his blessed
mother. The last thing to be performed is that when you know that God acts in
you by certain lights or good motions, which he bestows upon you, you must
receive these graces with a spirit altogether annihilated, with an humble heart
full of silence, without abandoning your self entirely to sensibility, and
without endeavoring by sighs or other tendernesses, to conserve or augment the
favors which you feel, above all keep your self barely attentive during the
whole time to God who acts in you, rather then to what he does. You must take
care not to rest in a speculative and languishing faith of his verities
accompanied with a barren and empty satisfaction, but ought to animate both
with a lively and practical faith, and efficacious resolution to act
accordingly.

IV. MASS.
AT eight of the clock hear mass, according to the practice which has been
taught you, or according to the spiritual exercise which you have for this
purpose in some of your manuals, or else you may satisfy your self with
observing the following directions. First go quietly to the Church, begging of
the blessed Virgin to obtain for you such sentiments and feelings of compassion
and love as she had for her son when she accompanied him to Mount Calvary, and
say to your self come let us go my Soul, let us go to see thy Savior
crucified. Secondly, entering into the Church, take holy water, conceiving an
hearty sorrow for your sins; and keeping your eyes in an humble submissive
posture, before your God and your Judge adore him with a lively faith, and give
him your heart. So long as you shall be in the Church, and chiefly all the time
of holy mass continue in a respectfull posture without looking about, and do
not sit down, unless by reason of some indisposition or weakness, or that you
should stay there very long. Thirdly, offer the mass you go to hear unto
Almighty God, in union with the intentions which Jesus Christ himself had, when
he offered the same sacrifice for us upon Mount Calvary, and which he now will
have when he offers it again to his eternal father upon the Altar. Protest
that you desire to join with him in his designs and to have the same interior
dispositions, as also to make your whole self a victime together with him to be
sacrificed to the glory of God alone, But in particular offer the mass for
these four ends, first, to honor the greatness of God, secondly, to thank him
for all the graces and favors that he has ever bestowed upon you; thirdly, to
help and comfort the poor souls in purgatory* and more especially those who are
forgotten and abandoned by others, or are detained there through your fault;
fourthly to beg of God for the sake of Jesus Christ some particular grace and
favor, as the victory over your own humor, the love of your enemies, a
greater recollection, and such other virtues, as you find your self to stand
most in need of, you may offer the same in the fifth place for that sinner who
shall be in danger that day of dying in mortal sin without confession.
Fourthly, after these intentions (which you ought, if you have opportunity, to
make before mass) if you have not time to say your vocal prayers after mass,
you may recite them from the beginning of mass till, Sanctus, but if you have
other time for them, attend during the whole mass with all interior
application imaginable to this great sacrifice, either as your spiritual
directour has advised, or according to the rules of your manual, or else after
this manner, first, in the beginning, ask together with the priest the pardon
of your sins, saying the Confiteor, and then till the Gospel exercise your soul
in the consideration of the goodness of God, who seeing in what an
impossibility we were of saving our selves, descended from heaven, made himself
man, was born in a stable, abasing and annihilating himself before his father
to appease his wrath, which we had justly provoked; then give thanks to our
Savior for this excess of bounty and goodness toward you, and protest that
this day you will endeavor to humble your self in gratitude for and in honor
of the humiliations and annihilations of his incarnation.

Secondly at the Gospel make an act of faith and belief of all the verities
which the priest there reads, protesting that you are ready to die for the
faith Beg of our Savior to augment and increase it in you, and to render it
lively and active; desire him to enlighten and convert all Infidels and
Heretics; and offer your self to his justice to suffer that day something for
their conversion. Thirdly at the offertory, offer up to God as a sacrifice by
the hands of Jesus Christ your body, soul, life, reputation, kindred, family,
estate, and all that you have, and protest that you will make no other use of
them then for the service and glory of God, and salvation of your own soul, and
that you will retrench whatsoever s'hall be ill in them, and even deprive your
self often of what is not absolutely useful, sanctifying your whole exterior
by the spirit and conduct of his grace. Fourthly, from, Sanctus, to the
Elevation, think upon the death of our Savior, going over the chief mysteries
of his passion from the garden of Olives to his crucifixion, but make this
reflection without staying long upon each particular, satisfying your self with
beholding Jesus suffering in these mysteries with a tender compassion, an
acknowledgement for, and a love of his goodness, together with sorrow for your
sins and wickedness. Fifthly, at the Elevation, offer unto the eternal father
Jesus Christ his only son, adore him as lifted up on the cross for your sins,
beg of him to obtain mercy for you and for all sinners, present to his father
all the drops of blood he shed, all the moments of sadness his heart suffered,
the wounds wherewith his whole body was covered, and the injuries he endured
for you, and beg of him for the sake hereof, that he would have mercy on you.

Sixthly, till, Domine non sum dignus, employ your thoughts upon Christ
sacrificed for your sake upon the Altar, consider that he is come thither for
your sake, that he thinks of you, that he prays for you, that he sacrifices
himself to the justice of his father to appease his wrath against you; in a
word, that this our amiable Savior is wholly taken up with you and for you
upon the Altar. This thought will move you presently to render thanks for this
great bounty, to hope firmly that you shall obtain whatever he asks for you,
to unite your intentions with those which he has in order to your salvation,
and to protest before God, that you ask the same which he asks for you, that
you sacrifice all that to him which he sacrificed for you, and that you will
stand to whatsoever promise he has made in your behalf. Seventhly, a little
before the Communion of the priest dispose your self to a spiritual Communion
by acts of faith, acknowledging that Jesus Christ is really upon the Altar, of
hope, confiding that he will render you partaker of the effects of this
adorable sacrament, of love, burning with an ardent desire of being united unto
him, of humility, esteeming your self unworthy to receive him sacramentally.
Eighthly after communion till the end of mass employ your self in thanking God
for the graces and favors he has bestowed upon you, and which he has asked
for you during this holy sacrifice, as also in offering your self as a victime
unto him, sacrificing to him for that day some word or action that is pleasing
to you. After mass say one, De profundis, one Pater and Ave, for the souls in
Purgatory, and return home with modesty and silence.

V. WORK.
ABout nine of the clock being retired home (for on those days wherein you do
not communicate, it is enough to be one hour in the Church in the morning, half
whereof may be spent in hearing mass, the other in vocal prayer) you must fall
to work, or do such busyness as you have in hand, taking care never to be idle,
the spirit or intention wherewith this ought to be done is, first, to offer
your work to God in union with that work and labor which Jesus and Mary
performed in their house. Secondly, to remember from time to time that God
looks upon you. Thirdly, to quit the action or worK as soon as the will of God
or charity shall call you else where, without adhering thereunto with too great
an affection. Fourthly to perform it with all the care and perfection that you
are able without neglecting any thing in it. Fifthly to thinK often that God
has condemned us for our sins to labor, and that one day in heaven we shall
have nothing to do, but to love God. Sixthly, if your work be at your own
disposal, do something from time to time for the poor, as about Christmas make
swaddling clouts for some child in honor of the Infant Jesus, or other worK for
the Altar according to your directours advice.

VI. EATING.
A Little before dinner maKe a short reflection upon the virtue of the month, or
the vice that is given you to overcome, see how you have behaved your self, and
ask grace of God by the intercession of your Patron, to taKe more care and
become more vigilant the rest of the day: one may add hereunto the reading of a
chapter out of Thomas ^ Kempis, if you have leisure, (which assure your self
will not be lost) secondly say grace, or the Benedicite not in have and barely
out of custom but with attention and respect, remembering that you speaK to
God, and that he beholds you. Thirdly, never pas^ a meal without offering to
our Lord some little bit which is most pleasing to you, depriving your self
thereof to give it him, but in such a manner as that no notice may be taken of
it. Fourthly, from time to time offer to God this action, which of it self
being low, mean, and indifferent, ought to be animated with an holy intention
to maKe it meritorious of heaven. Fifthly, sit at table with modesty and
gravity, without being taken up with, or searching after the pleasing of your
appetite: think sometimes how Jesus and Mary performed this action (and this
ought to be the model you propose to your self in all other actions.) In fine
remember that the Saints gave with regret and only out of necessity this
satisfaction to their ^odies, which they looked upon as their ^reatest enemies.
Sixthly I would ^ounsell you not to eat between meals without great necessity,
but you may ^reakfast, because perhaps you may ^uffer prejudice by fasting all
the morning, and consequently be less able to perform your business.

VII. CONVERSATION.
OF all the actions of the day this is that in which you ought most to stand
upon your guard, because there is more danger of offending God in this then in
all others. In effect the holy Scripture says, that he who offends not with his
tongue is perfect: wherefore to render your conversation truly Christian, and
in it to bridle your tongue, observe the following advice. First, never speak
of the faults of others, if you be not obliged in conscience to reprehend them,
or to give others account of them. Secondly before you enter into conversation,
recommend your heart and tongue to your good Angel, that yo^ may say nothing,
nor consent to any thing that is said against your neighbor. Thirdly avoid as
much as you can the conversation of worldings who speak of nothing in these
times but vanity, fashions, and ornaments a la mode; But when necessity or
decency obliges you to such company, stay as little amongst them as may be,
because one ordinarily comes from them with wandering thoughts, and a heart very
insensible of what belongs to God. Fourthly take care also not to talk too much
of devotion, of prayer and direction, because ordinarily there is much of
self-loue and vanity in speaking too much of these matters, and it is more
secure to hear others then to speak much on this subject. Fifthly,
Notwithstanding you ought to let no conversation pass in which you do not
handsomely bring in some good discourse (and you will do well to seek the
company of such as love to speak of God) nevertheless you ought to entertain
none but your directour with any discourse of your own interior. Sixthly,
never say any thing either to your own advantage, or against your self, for
oftentimes it is a counterfeit humility to undervalue ones self before others;
whereas we should be very sorry that they should believe us to be such as we
represent our selves; but the true mark of sincere humility is not to excuse
our selves when we are reprehended or blamed for any thing. That a wife may
Keep the respect due to her husband, and a child to its father and mother, let
them remember never to loose it in speaking, saying nothing that may offend
them, nor contradicting them with obstinacy, or answering them with coldness,
indifference, disrespect, or contempt. Eighthly, if you desire the spirit of
recollection and prayer, fly the world and company as much as you can, never
maKing visits but for mere necessity, nor entertaining any familiar
acquaintance but with one or two persons of devotion like your self. Nin^ly,
banish from your conversation all unprofitable curiosity con^ning the life and
conduct of others, vanity, sowrness and immoderate afection, carry your self
cheerfully^ ciuilly, but so as to avoid distractio^ or dissipation of mind.

VIII. READING.
AFter dinner and the recreation following it, you must read in some spiritual
booK for half, or a quarter of an hour, as shall be appointed you, and that you
may do this with fruit, first, in the beginning humbly crave grace of our
Savior to profit by it, saying either, veni sancte Spiritus, or a Pater and
Ave. Secondly read not out of curiosity and in haste, but leisurely and with
attention, and when you meet with any thing either moving or instructiue, rest
there a little while, endeavoring, as it were to relish it, consider how you
may be able that day to practice it, and beg of the holy ghost to imprint it in
your heart. Thirdly be not in pain to read ^any pages in your book, read a
^^ttle, but with great recollection and ^ttention, always apply what y^u ^ead
in order to practice, and consider ^ow and then that those very truths, which
you read will condemn you one day before gods tribunal if you do not follow
them. Fourthly let not this spiritual reading be ordinarily but in solid and
moving books, and such as your directour shall approve. Fifthly be not troubled
if you remember nothing of what you have read, but commit all that you have
read to him who is able to touch and move your heart independently of those
truths which you read. Sixthly after your reading thanK God for having thereby
instructed you, and make a firm resolution by the assistance of his grace to
practice the Instructions he has given you.

IX. SILENCE.
AFter your reading you must r^turn to your work if you have not some business
which obliges yo^ to go abroad, and take care at two ^ the clock to keep an
half, or a quarter of an hour of silence according a^ your directour shall
thinK fit. Durin^ the time of your silence, first, often call to mind the
silence which Jesus Mary and Joseph often observed durin^ their work, uniting
your silence wit^ theirs, sometimes think of the sacred silence observed in
heaven by the Saints, who are wholly absorp't i^ God, and do you sigh and long
after that happy repose; sometimes also entertain your self in your heart with
your good Angel, thanKing him for the care he taKes of your salvation,
promising him due respect and fidelity in performing whatsoever he shall
inspire you to do, and begging of him to present your prayers, and the desires
of your heart to our Savior: you may at another time employ your thoughts on
the necessity of spending our time well and on the account which we must render
to God, for every moment of our life: or if you please in case you be alone,
recite some vocal prayers which you can say by heart, but taKe care that no
one perceives this Keeping of silence in you, unless it be such as observe the
like, and therefore make no difficulty in answering any question which is made
you, satisfying your self that you do not speak of your own accord. Thirdly
offer this silence to God in satisfaction for the faults you have that day
committed in speaking. Fourthly, I would counsel you to impose on your self
from time to time some little space of silence, for example, during a Misere,
when you have spoken any words of humor or sensual inclination or against
charity, imposing it on your self when you have most desire to speak.

X. The visit of the blessed Sacrament and of the prayer in the evening called,
the Salve.
Toward four or five of the clock in the evening go to the Church, either to
make a second half hour of prayer, if your directour judges it convenient, or
to be present at the Benediction or Salve. Take care to perform this visit of
the blessed Sacrament with spirit and fervor, and not merely out of custom,
and without fruit. First on sundays present your self to our blessed Savior,
to honor the glorious state of his body risen from the dead, which is upon the
Altar, testifying the joy you have of its glory, rendering thanks to the blessed
Trinity for this mavelous beauty which it has communicated to the sacred body
of our blessed Savior, and begging of him with confidence to bestow on your
body a participation of these glorious qualities at the resurrection, making a
strong resolution to receive with love all corporal pains, which will purchase
such a resplendent glory to our bodies, as the pains and torments which our
savior suffered brought to his, doing in fine the same by an act of faith
toward Jesus Christ, which the Saints perform toward him in the clear sight
of his glory. Secondly, on Mondays honor in this visit the state of a victim
or sacrifice, which our savior has in the blessed Sacrament, offering up your
whole self to his love, sacrificing to him the curiosity of your eyes, the
bitterness and impatience of your speech, the eagerness of your desires, the
distractions of your mind and the evil affections and inclinations of your
heart; and since Jesus Christ, always bears about him this state of death and
quality of a victim or sacrifice on our Altars, offering himself continually on
them to his eternal father for us, so to honor him in this state, you must
all the day long carry the spirit of a sacrifice about you, which will cause
you in all occasions to die to your own humors and inclinations, and to
sacrifice to God your natural repugnances. And it is on this day you must
possess your self of such sentiments as these, that all the week following you
may practice the same, considering Jesus Christ in this visit as a victime both
of justice and love, and begging of him to render you conformable to himself
herein. Thirdly on Tuesdays, honor the exact and constant obedience which
Jesus practices in the blessed Sacrament, submitting himself to the voice or
call of a man, and abandoning himself to his disposal how bad soever he be,
and make a firm resolution of doing all things with the spirit of obedience,
submitting your self to all, and obeying those in particular who are in the
place of Superiors. Fourthly on wednesdays employ your self in the
consideration of the wonderful patience of Jesus in the blessed Sacrament,
which causes him to suffer all the outrages of heretics and ill christians
with perfect constancy, not being weary of staying lay and night upon our
Altars, that he may gain the hearts even of his enemies. Endeavor to honor
this patience by a compassion of his sufferings, and by asking pardon for such
as are wanting in their respect unto him, and by devoting your self to his
justice with a resolution to suffer all things without murmuring for the
satisfaction thereof, and even to oblige those who offend you. Fifthly on
Thursdays, honor the humility of Jesus in the blessed Sacrament, which makes
him live such an hidden and contemptible life, often abandoned and forsaken by
all men for whose salvation he sacrifices himself upon the Altar; wherefore
animate your self to bear him company as often as you can, sighing and longing
in your heart after Jesus in the blessed Sacrament when you are absent in body,
and loving and defiring a life like unto his, which renders you unKnown,
neglected, and abandoned of all the world. Sixthly on frydays, honor his love
which obliges him to give himself entirely to you without an reserve, to the
end that you may b^ wholly transformed into him, Endeavor to express such a
disinteresse love toward him; but be sure to manifest the same rather by deeds
the^^ words. Seventhly on Saturdays, honor that liberality which he expresse^
in those graces he bestows on you in your communions, and by keeping himself
always upon the Altar to appease the wrath of his father, which is enkindled
against you. Thank him for the miracles he works, that he may give himself unto
you. Admire a God who is (as it were) so prodigal of himself. Beg pardon for
the ill use you have made of so many graces as he has bestowed on you in your
communions. The subjects of these visits may oftentimes serve you for the
entertainment of your prayer in the afternoon.

XI. EXAMEN.
A Little before dinner, recollect your self and take a view of the ^nfidelitys
which you have been guilty of that morning in the practice of the virtue of the
month, in overcoming ^our own ill humors, bad inclinations and natural
repugnances, beg pardon for them of God by a sigh or two from the bottom of
your heart. At night before you go to bed, make your general Examen, first of
your ordinary faults and sudden sallies of passion; Secondly touching the ill
use of divine graces, and the ill employment of your time; Thirdly touching the
spirit and intention wherewith you have animated your actions, examining
whether they proceeded from natural inclination, passion, or mere custom, or
else were performed with a good intention and inward fervor, then make a solid
and sincere act of sorrow, rather then a sensible one, and unite it by your
intention with that act of contrition, which you shall endeavor to make ar
your next confession, and that you may produce this act the better, cast your
eyes upon Jesus crucified by you and for you, and behold with confusion and
regret, a God expiring through grief and love in your behalf sometimes consider
the bounty and Goodness of God, in expecting you, in seeking after you, and in
receiving you with love, after so many infidelities and offenses; sometimes
hearken to what he says in the bottom of your heart. Grow you weary of
offending me, since you see I do not grow weary of doing what good I can for
you; Sacrifice to me that vanity, that curiosity, that humor, that sudden
motion of anger, which has so many years stood in competition with me for the
possession of your heart, for which ^ have sacrificed the very last drop of my
blood. After your Examen say five Paters and Aves in penance for your faults.
When you go to bed, think a little on death which may perhaps surprise you that
very night.

XII. The spirit of recollection which we ought to preserve during the whole
day.
THe spirit of recollection is the fruit of a good prayer, and of a communion
worthily received; you will obtain this recollection, by calling to mind the
presence of God, which you may do, first, by breathing forth every hour these
or the like aspirations: My God I am wholly yours. O that I might die to my
self, to live to you and die in your love! Secondly, say in the beginning of
every work or action: I do all for you my God, all in your presence, all for
your love, o how glad am I to please you in this action! Thirdly, entering into
company say, o my good Angel, guard my ^ heart and tongue, to the end I may
neither speak any thing against charity, nor hear it with complacence, or any
other concurrence on my part, Fourthly, being in pain or trouble, as also in
aridity or dryness in prayer, or at any time out of humor, say, o my God, be
you my strength and support, let me take a satisfaction in that pleasure which
you have that I should suffer for your sake. I am confounded in your presence,
to see how miserable and weak I am in the performance of what is good, but at
the same time, I rejoice at my being nothing since you are all: I willingly
accept, and am heartily contented with my weaknesses and imbecillities, which
may serve to destroy all self-loue, and to establih your most holy and pure
love in my heart. Fifthly, being ready to give way to any sudden anger or other
passion, cast your eyes on God, who looks on you and preserves you from
yiedling to the temptation, and say, let me rather die o my God then satisfy
my self in any thing that displeases you. By the frequent use of these
aspirations, you will conserve your heart in devotion, and be always diposed
for prayer, you will easily hinder distractions of mind which at that time are
wont to disturb you: whatsoever you do, will be (as I may say) full of God; you
will live with such an equality and stedfastness of mind, as will render you
superior to all sallies of passion, and animate all your actions with
interior life and spirit.

XIII. The spirit of mortification for every day.
YOu shall practice this mortification, first, in your eyes, depriving them of
all curiosity and voluntary levity. Secondly in your tongue, forbearing all
words of curiosity, anger, vanity, impatience, and detraction Thirdly, in your
taste, restraining and moderating its sensuality, and the too great desire and
curiosity of your appetite, and above all, by not eating without necessity
between meals: Fourthly, in the sense of hearing, avoiding to hearken after
news, or other unprofitable curiosities touching the life or manners of others,
and such affairs as do not belong to you. Fifthly, in your body, fasting or
using some other mortification, according to the advice, and with the
permission of your directour. Sixthly, in your mind, cutting off all
unprofitable reflections upon your self or others, but especially such as
disquiet you or proceed from human respects. Seventhly, in your heart,
restraining its solicitude and hasty eagerness in what it goes about, the
excessive ardour of its desires, the disquiets and anxieties that afflict it
when it is discontented, the vain satisfaction which it takes in any graces
received from Almighty God, its too great tie or in ordinate affection to its
devotions, and in fine, whatsoever is sensible therein; since your heart must
die to all these things, that it may live entirely to God, wherefore by little
and little, you must wholly destroy, or at least moderate them. Above all,
study to deny your own will by an exact fidelity and a constancy in that rule
or course of life which you have undertaken, and by overcoming all your
natural repugnances; and this is the exercise wherein (properly speaking) true
devotion and solid virtue consist.

CHRISTIAN TRUTHS which may serve for subject or matter of aspirations prayer,
for ore very day, when one has not taken any determinate subject or when what
we have taKen does not move us.
I.
THere is nothing great but God, and nothing to be esteemed but what conduces
to his service; all the rest ought to be despised.

II.
GOd knows all the misery that happens to me, and can deliver me from it, if he
pleases, and having done and suffered so much as he has for my sake, I cannot
doubt but that he loves me; wherefore certainly it is more advantageous for me
to suffer this misery wherein I am at present, then to be delivered from it,
since God does not think fit to take it away.

III.
IT is now a long time that the goodness of God has urged me to overcome this
ill habit, this domineering passion, that his patience has expected my
amendment, and that his mercy has received me into favor, as often as I have
confessed these failings; and yet I use no endeavor to correct and overcome
them: ought I not to grow weary of offending a God who is not weary of
pardoning me?

IV.
TO act in gods presence with sloth or passion to act with God by a motive of
self-loue, is to dishonor his presence, to abuse his power, and to injure his
love.

V.
IF a soul in purgatory had but one hour of that time which we loose, what
would it not do to merit heaven? and if we had been but one moment in those
flames, what would we not to do avoid the least venial sin?

VI.
THe abuse of gods graces and favors is so much the more to be feared, by how
much the less it is apprehended; there is no inspiration which cost not our
Savior Jesus Christ much blood and pain, and yet every moment we neglect and
contemn them: o how terrible will be the account which one day will be demanded
of them!

VII.
THat we may be able to suffer with courage, we must consider, that we suffer
in the presence of God, for God, and with God; That the happiness of a
Christian upon earth consists in suffering, that pains are the heart's delight
of Jesus; and that pure love is only found upon the cross: wherefore we ought
to suffer purely, without consolation, faithfully, without sloth, and
peaceably, without impatience.

VIII.
JEsus laid in the manger, Jesus dying on the cross, and Jesus sacrificed for
us on the Altar, ought to be the center of our hearts, and of our devotion, to
the end that these three states of Jesus may render us victims of the love,
justice, and wisdom of God.

IX.
A Soul ought always to have the desire of seeing God, the fear of loosing him,
and the sorrow of not being yet worthy to possess him.

X.
SOlid virtue and true devotion consist, first, in using a continual violence
against our selves; Secondly, in a continual victory over our natural
repugnances: Thirdly, in not yiedling to, or sparing our selves in any thing of
humor or passion: Fourthly, in suffering with joy, or at least, with an
interior and exterior quietness, the being reprehended for our faults before
others, and contradicted in all our inclinations. If we do not endeavor to get
this abnegation, we may be assured, that we shall never get solid virtue, and
that all our devotion will be nothing else but delusion.

X.
WHat a folly is it to have so great an affection to, or concern for such goods
as in a moment will slip away from us, and so great an indifferency for those
that will remain with us for ever! and this, when we know that those are not so
much as the shadow of these? o my God! is it reasonable, that there should be
nothing but you which we can loose without displeasure? or that we should be
less concerned to loose a suit at law, or displease a friend?

XII.
WE ought to go to confession with a spirit of sorrow, and to come from it with
a spirit of sacrifice and oblation, in offering our selves entirely to the
rigours of the justice of God, and arming our selves with a just desire of
tevenging on our selves all the injuries which we have done to God. We ought
moreover, to remember after confession, to apply the satisfactions of our dying
Jesus for our sins, offering them to his Eternal father; as also, to present
to the justice of God all the sufferings which he shall please to send us till
our next confession, resolving to impose some penance on our selves over and
above what the Confessor has enjoined us, as some alms, some restraint of our
humor or passion, or the like; but above all we, ought to take care not to
dissipate or distract our selves immediately after confession.

XIII.
APproach unto Jesus Christ in the Communion with such a lively faith of his
presence, as may put you to an holy confusion; Secondly, with such a
confidence, as those sick persons had, who (according to the Scripture) doubted
not but that they should be healed, if they could but once approach Jesus
Christ, or touch his garments: Thirdly, with a fervent love, and with a great
desire of uniting your self most intimately with Jesus, and of transforming
your self entirely into him, that you may neither live nor act but by him for
him, and in him. Fourthly, receive him with a profound respect, thumbling and
annihilating your self in his presence; and being content to remain at his feet
in silence: Fifthly, beg of him, that he himself would return thanks to his
eternal father for you, that he would entertain himself within you, since you
are unable to make him such an entertainment as he deserves, and that he would
ask for you that which he sees necessary: Sixthly, join with that sacrifice
which he makes of himself in your heart, a sacrifice of whatsoever is there
displeasing to him. Seventhly, asK of him with confidence, a victory over your
bad inclinations, and offer some one of your defects to him, desiring him to
overcome it in you, and cause you to keep a watch over your self for that
purpose, till your next communion. Eighthly, remember, that the true fruit of a
good communion, consists in strength to overcome your self in occasions, and to
keep your self more recollected, during that whole day, rather then in
tenderness and sensible devotion which is soon dissipated.

XIV.
ONe ought to neglect nothing in the service of God, but to be very faithful
to avoid the least and most light imperfections, and to overcome ones self in
small things, to perform even the least actions as in the presence of God, to
mortify ones self in a thousand very inconsiderable occasions, to sanctify the
least pains by a general resignation of our selves to the justice of God,
without this fidelity, it is impossible ever to arrive to an eminent perfection,
nay one will soon fall into ^epidity, and into a great danger of being lost.

XV.
ALl the world speaks of dying to themselves, but few know what it is, and
scarce any one does it with such fidelity as is necessary; and yet none can
have an entire conversion to God, and live entirely to him, without ceasing to
live to them selves. The first step that leads to this death, is to deny all
such satisfaction to our senses as is either inordinate, or unprofitable, and
to purify them, by mortifying and displeasing objects. Wherefore, it is no^
enough not to forbear the looking on any object with any tie of satisfaction or
curiosity, or the giving ear to any thing which is spoken against our
neighbor, or to what we have too eager a desire of knowing, or the speaking
with passion, impatience, or vanity, or the eating between meals, or at meals,
with too much desire of pleasing our appetites; I say, it is not enough, to
refuse these and a thousand other little commodities and unprofitable pleasures
to our bodies, but we ought to oblige our selves sometimes to see, to speak,
and to hear such things as we have a repugnance to, and which mortify and
displease us. The second step to die to ones self, is to suppress and stifle
such reflections and thoughts of mind, as are unprofitable or curious, or may
give our soul any inclination toward creatures. The third step is to moderate
the desires of our heart, when they are too violent, and to retrench or cut
off all adhesion and tie to creatures, all search after them, and all rest and
confidence in them, that we may keep fast to God alone.

DISPOSITIONS of mind during the time of Advent. I.
An ardeni desire thut Jesus Christ may be born and reign absolutely in our
hearts.

The 1. Exercise. For the Morning.
THat which was done from the beginning of the world by the holy Patriarcks,
who all sighed after the coming of our Savior, for the salvation of all
mankind in general, the same each christian ought to perform for his own
advantage in particular, during this holy time of Advent.

1. We ought to wish that Jesus may be born in us, and this ought to be our
only, as well as efficacious and constant desire, that is to say, 1. We must
desire nothing but to possess Jesus, and be possessed by him, to love him and
to be beloved by him. (2.) we must desire that he should reign absolutely in
our understandings, by a lively and active faith, in our hearts, by a strong
and overruling love which may render our wills entirely subject to his, and
bound and stop all the sallies of humor and passion over our senses, by
depriving them of all such satisfactions as they inordinately seek after, and
over our actions, by conforming our life to the pattern of his own; because it
is by this means, that Jesus will be born in our hearts and reign absolutely in
them, and will be in us, as the soul of a holy and perfect life. 3. In fine,
this desire of the birth of Jesus in our souls, ought to be constant; that we
may joyfully consent, that our Savior should himself endeavor to form his own
image within us, by pains both of body and mind, by persecutions from men, and
derelictions from God, and by all the evils of this life as a carver makes use
of his chissel and hammer, and by force of blows, renders his statue
beautiful, cutting o^ whatever is any way rude or deformed therein.

2. But that we may obtain of Go^ this spiritual birth of Jesus Christ in our
souls, let us address ou^ selves to the blessed Trinity; let u^ daily ask of
the Eternal Father to give us his son; that is to say, tha^ he would animate
us with his spirit and with his maxims, and destroy in us the spirit and maxims
of the world And we out of a due acKnowledge^ment of so precious a gift (since
'ti^ no less then God himself) ought to receive the same with much respect and
gratitude in the communion, where of, it is good to partake frequently during
this holy time.

3. Let us beg of the son of God that he would give himself entirely to our
souls as a victim in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, wherein he
incorporates himself with us, and transforms us in to himself; and that as the
the fruit and benefit of our communions, he would let us live only for him, by
him, and in him: For him, as the end of all our actions, by a pure and holy
intentions; by him, as the source and life of whatsoever we shall either do,
say or think; and in him, as in a center, where our hearts will be at rest: Or
else, that he would give himself unto us, as the model and pattern of our life,
which cannot be christian, unless it be like unto that of Jesus Christ: Or
lastly, that he would bestow himself on us as the remedy, and vanquisher of
sin, of self-loue, and of our evil inclinations, hindering us from falling into
any voluntary fault, healing the wounds and scarrs which sin has made in our
souls, by imparting to us a sincere sorrow for having committed them, a firm
resolution of avoiding them, the tears and sighs of an humble contrite heart
and the holy martyrdom of an heart, which is an enemy to its own pleasures, and
is armed against it self b^ an holy hatred.

4. Let us in fine, beg of the holy Ghost, that he would produce and form Jesus
Christ in our hearts, by the mos^ pure flames of his love, and that he would
imprint in them the simplicity, humility, and innocence of the Infant Jesus.
(1. His simplicity, first, that we may treat with God in prayer, without
reflecting on any thing which is not himself, nor even on that which we receive
from him, to the end that we may unite our selves to him with the whole
strength of our souls, permitting him to take the entire possession of us:
Next, that we may treat with men in our commerce and conversations, without any
dissimulation or deceit: And lastly, that we may treat wit hour own selves,
without flattering our selves in our faults, or hiding them from our own sight
(2.) His humility, nor such however as that of a God (as it were) annihilated,
for man cannot descend or humble himself after this manner, because he cannot
go beyond his nothing, out of which he was taken; but such as consist in a
sincere acknowledgement of what we are viz* according to nature, pure nothing,
neither meriting of, nor good for any thing; and in respect of grace, unable to
think so much as one good for any thing; and in respect of grace, unable to
think so much as one good thought by our own strength, or to recover our selves
from the state of sin without the actual help and assistance of God; having
only power of our selves, to do evil, and incur our damnation.

3. The innocence of the Infant Jesus, that we may be preserved from all sin,
and even from such venial ones as are voluntary, and free from all inordinate
affections, or ties to creatures, and as far as is possible, from all
imperfection (4.) That you may obtain these graces of the Infant Jesus, say at
the end of your prayer (for matter whereof, you may take these considerations)
1. time Pater and Ave and 3. times Gloria Patri, And often, in the day time,
endeavor to produce in your heart, most ardent desires that Jesus Christ may
be born in you.

II. Adore Jesus in the bosom of Mary, and salute Mary in the heart of Jesus.
THE II EXERCISE. For the Evening.
1. WE must consider with a profound respect a God enclosed in the womb of a
Virgin, and acknowledge in adoring him, that as little, as hidden, and as
annihilated as he is, in the chaste bowels of the Virgin, he is the same God
who is adored by the Angels in heaven, and is the absolute Lord and Sovereign
of all creatures; Then unite our selves in spirit and will, with those all
divine dispositions which he possesses in the bosom of Mary and with the most
loving designs he has for our salvation.

2. Let us take notice of the virtues which this Infant God practiced in this
prison in which he was shut up for nine months together, for our instruction
and for our good* Let us admire the profound humility of an Infant shut up in
his mothers womb. In effect, he there hides his power under weakness, he there
confines his immensity within the little body of an Infant, and annihilates all
the splendor of his glory in the obscurity and lowlyness of Infancy. And after
all this, is it just that pure nothings as we are, should desire to elevate our
selves above others, despise them, give place to none, search after the esteem
of men, and have a high conceit and idea of our selves? O how far do we fly
from annihilated Jesus, while we elevate our selves by those sentiments of
vanity!

3. 3. Let us consider the patience of the same Savior undergoing the
incommodities to which all Infants are subject whilst they are in this
condition. Alas my Jesus! from this very time, thou did foresee my
impatience, my murmurings, my delicacy that would suffer nothing: and you
punished your self on their score for me, from that very time, I begun to give
you that pain, and cause you to suffer for the ungrateful, and sacrifice your
self for miserable creatures who apprehend nothing more then to suffer. O
Pains, o dolours, o Incommodities of life, how dear ought you to be to me,
since from this very time you became the hearts delight of my Jesus!

4. In fine represent to your self, how rude and severe the mortification was,
which little Jesus exercised upon his senses in the womb of his mother; having
deprived them of their exercises, and of all their natural satisfaction, that
so you may do penance for all the sensual pleasures you abandon your selves
unto. O curiosity of my eyes, how sensible you are to my Jesus, since to make
satisfaction for you, he remained nine months in his mothers womb without
seeing any thing! How highly am I obliged to you my Savior, for imposing so
long a silence upon your tongue, to obtain pardon for all my evil or
unprofitable speeches which mine has pronounced. O how heartily I renounce for
love of you, all the satisfaction of my senses, all the delicacys of my body,
and all the affections I may feel in me that are human, curious, or
unprofitable. O Jesus, o amiable Infant, o adorable victim of justice and love,
I unite my self to the sacrifice you made of your entire self to your eternal
Father, from the first moment of your life, which was a sacrifice of fidelity,
of sorrow, and of obedience. O grant, that I may consummate it with you upon
the cross!

5 Say Nine Paters and Aves every day to honor the nine months that Jesus
Christ was in the womb of the Virgin and salute Jesus as often in the womb of
Mary, and Mary, in the heart of Jesus. Retire your self from company as much as
you are able, increase your mortifications in your time of silence, keep your
mind sweetly employed with the thoughts of the profound silence and intimate
union of the soul of Mary, altogether lost and swallowed up in the bottomless
depth of the heart of Jesus; Enter with her into this adorable sanctuary of
love; which you will find full of bounty for you, and wholly taken up with the
thoughts of your salvation. O how is Mary filled with the love of Jesus! and o
how is Jesus replenished with the love of Mary, and whith charity for sinners!
O holy Virgin, I conjure you by this admirable favor which you had in the
possession of your Jesus, to fill my heart with the love of him.

For the Feast and Octave of Christmas.
I.
Employ half an hour in Christmas night, or in the day, to think upon the most
amiable mystery of the birth of Godman, Consider all the circumstances of it
with admiration and love, represent to your self an Infant laid upon straw in a
poor stable, all trembling with cold, bound up in swaddling clouts, exposed to
the winds, unknown to men for whose salvation he came into the world; and both
he and his holy Mother abandoned, and in want of all human succors: and
finding your self astonished at so strange a condition, to which you see your
Savior reduced; let your heart, pierced with compassion, and filled with
gratitude for little Jesus, break out in these exclamations: o bounty, o
inconceivable love of my God! is it possible that my soul should be so dear to
thee that for love of it, thou should subject thy self to so many miseries? O
humiliations of my Jesus, how do you condemn my pride and my vanity! O amiable
Jesus, and so much the more lovely, by how much the more you have debased your
self for my sake! What, my soul, can thou behold a God, who has dispoiled
himself of the splendor of his glory, and embraced an extreme poverty to
enrich thee with his graces and yet endure to take pleasure in the dresses and
worldly ornaments of your body? You see a God which makes himself an Infant, as
humble, poor, and obedient as an Infant, and you can have vanity,
dissimulation, malice and repugnance in obeyying!

2. Approach with confidence this most lovely Infant, and beg of the blessed
Virgin and Saint Joseph, to present you to him. Adore him with respect, because
he is your God; Love him with tenderness, because he is a victim of love, that
offered himself for your sake. Mix your tears with his, weep with compassion
over his sufferings, whilst he weeps for sorrow over your sins: Fear nothing,
he is an amiable Infant, and wholly yours, his heart is full of charity for
you, his eyes are full of sweetness and tenderness; he is all love: Approach
him, and embrace him with all the ardour of your heart; loose your self, let
your self be swallowed up in this bottomless ocean of love: let your self burn
and consume in this sacred fire, and beg of this divine Infant, to be born and
live in you; That he may become the soul of your soul, that he may wean and
disengage your heart from the love of of temporal goods, to imitate his
poverty, and that he may make you live a life full of humility, of obedience,
and simplicity, to enter thereby into the true spirit of his Infancy.

II.
1. EAch day of the Octave, renew these sentiments in your prayer in the
evening, take part in the joy which the Angels and shepherds, tefied at the
sight of a God become an Infant. Acknowledge a God, by the marks which heaven
gives of him in the crib; To wit, in the swaddling cloths, and in the extreme
poverty in which he was born, and stongly convince your self that you ought to
be poor either in effect, or in heart to resemble Jesus and to save your self.

2. Give in the honor of Jesus the Infant, some suit or swaddling cloths to the
child of some poor body, and visit during this office, the children brought up
in the Hospital, doing them some service with as much affection, as you would
to the Infant Jesus.

3. Apply your self to keep your heart in an indifferency to all things, in a
resignation to the divine providence, in peace and silence before this divine
Infant, as Infants are wont to live in indifferency to all things, and without
concerning themselves for any thing, reposing wholly upon the care of their
parents.

4. Speak little to creatures during this time, to be the better able to employ
your self the more in the thoughts and love of the Infant Jesus; forget your
self, to be able to thinK of nothing but him. O love, o love, how powerful art
thou to make of God an Infant! O my heart how ungrateful art thou, if thou
love not this Infant God! This is the aspiration, which thou ought to
renew several times a day.

5. In fine, approach often, if your Directour rhink fit, to holy communion,
during the Octave, to incorporate your self with the Infant Jesus, to act
nothing but by his spirit, to live no more but by his life, to love
humiliations, poverty, the interior renunciation of all satisfaction of the
heart, or the senses, that is, the better to conform your self to these
inclinations of little Jesus.

The exercises of Christian life during lent.
GENERAL ADVICES
I. Lent is a time of Sanctity.
THe time of lent is a time of sanctity and devotion, these are the days of
salvation as the scripture styles them: so that we ought to apply our selves,
more at this time then at any other of the year, with an exact fidelity, to our
perfection, tha^ is to say:

1. To perform our exercises of devotion with more fervor and frit, and our
exterior exercise with a greater interior.

To be more upon our guard, to resist all the sallys of our humor, all the
unprofitable reflections or relapses of our minds upon creatures, and all the
extravagancies of our senses.

3. To use violence to ones self, to overcome ones natural repugnances, and to
act no longer according to custom or inclination, but according to the
interior spirit of grace.

4. To entertain ones self more frequently in the presence of God, either ones
mind, by a frequent recourse to him, or ones heart, by a constant desire to
please him.

5. To apply ones self with greater zeal to the practice of some virtue every
month, and in the day to make some interior or exterior acts of it.

6. To make it o^es study to keep ones self i^ time of prayer, peaceable,
humble, submissive, and respectfull before God, without disquieting or
troubling ones felf for all the distractions, distasts, and sterilitys that may
happen in it, seeking nothing else but to please God, without minding to please
ones self; Remembering the advice our Lord gives us, not to discourse too much
in it, and with peace of mind, to be satisfied with the state of privation and
insensibility, when God puts us therein.

To labor by means of our examition, to know all that is bad or ill in us, to
correct it; that which is human, to purify it, and that which is unprofitable
to elevate it.

8. Not to content ones self with an affective devotion, which consists only
in good thoughts, desires, and resolutions, which one may have to do well: but
to persuade ones self that true devotion and solid virtue consist in doing what
God will have us, in spite of all our natural repugnances.

9. In ones spiritual reading, to relish well what one reads, and as in all
ones other actions to expect therefrom, all the fruit of gods grace

10 To make ones conf^ssions with more sorrow for what is past, more confusion
for the present, more resolution for the future, and more circumspection over
ones self, the day one has confessed.

11. To make ones communion^ with more faith* confidence, and love, with a more
ardent desire to unite ones self to Jesus Christ, with a more profound respect,
with a greater recollection and union to the sacrifice which Christ makes in
our hearts, to his eternal Father, more fervency in our demands, more
reservedness, the rest of the day.

II. Lent is a time of penance.
PEnance is either interior, which consists in an efficacious sorrow for our
sins, or exterior, which comprehe^ds satisfactory works. For the first one,
ought all the lent long to have ones heart continually contrite and humble
before God, and so perform out of this stock of sorrow, and state of
compunction, a continual mortification during this holy time consecrated
entirely to penance. So that every hour, it were good to make an act of
contrition for ones sins, rather by a sigh of our heart, then by Formal words:
my God, forgive me, I Will sin no more, my God, I Will do nothing more to displease
thee. For the second, one ought to observe, when at age, the fast of the
Church. But (1.) we must perform it with such joy, as our savior instructs us
to do, as may be so much the greater, the more pain we have to do it, for then
the merit is also greater. 2. We must perform it in union with the fast of
Jesus Christ, for to honor it. 3. In the exact privation of all things that
may flatter our senses I mean, of the curiosity of our eyes, our ears, or the
satisfactions or nice choice of words, for we ought to join the abstinence of
our other senses, with our mouths.

2. We ought to augment our ordinary austeritys according to the advice of our
directour.

3. We ought to distribute great alms then ordinary, yet not without our
directours advice, because w^ ought to do penance at this time for our whole
years sins.

III. Lent is a time of solitude.
It Is at this time the better to honor the solitude of Jesus Christ that we
ought to form to our selve^ an interior and exterior solitude The first
consists in removing from our memorys all ill, human, and unprofit^ble
thoughts, and to let it b^ taken up with nothing but God present; or his holy
will; to blot out o^ ones understanding, all esteem of vanitys, honors, and
reputation before men, and to admit thereinto no oath esteem but that which may
render u^ great before God; and by a simpl^ return toward him, to repress in
our hearts, all natural motions, desires, or ties and inclinations to any
creature, and to entertain continually therein an ardent desire to please God
and to overcome ones self. In fine, to cut of all the ill and unprofitable
satisfactions of the senses. This watching over ones heart, and over ones
senses, is called interior solitude. To perform the exterior one, we ought to
cut off all visits which are not made either out of charity, or necessity.

2. To visit every week the poor in the Hospital, or in prisons, to sati^fie
for so many unprofitable or worldly visits made all the year.

3. To keep, if possible, an hour of silence every day, to honor that which
our Savior kept this holy time.

4. To avoid in conversation, that licencious ness in laughter, and discourses,
that tend to excess.

5. To interdict ones self, above all things, the speaking ill of our neighbor.

PRACTICES OF PIETY during Lent.
I. To honor the Passion, and the Sacred wounds of Jesus Christ with some
particular devotion.
AS Lent disposes us to celebrate with more devotion the mysterys of the
Passion of Jesus Christ, so it is convenient the better to conform ones self to
the intention of the holy Church to employ ones thoughts oft^n on them during
this time, and to honor after a particular manner, the wounds which our Lord
received for love of us; of which I here give you the practice.

1. Make every day an hour of meditation upon one of the mysteries of the
Passion of our Savior, with sentiments of compassion, for the sufferi^gs of a
God; of sorrow for your sins, the cause of them: of love, for the exceeding
goodness which reduced our Savior to so pitiful a condition: of confidence,
in that adorable blood shed for our sakes: and of imitation, to animate our
selves to suffer any thing at the sight of God expiring for love and pain for
you.

2. Say every day the little office of the holy cross.

3. Let no day of Lent pass without a desire to suffer something either in body
or mind, by the rigor of the season, by your own discontents or the ill
humors of others, and when you find any such occasion instead of making any
return, or com^laint of others, or of tenderness toward your self, do you
offer up likewise all your pain to Jesus Christ crucified, unite your self to
his interior dispositions, sacrifice your self to the rigor of his divine
justice for your sins, and for his love, as he sacrificed himself thereto for
yours. Stifle all the bitterness of your heart, and all the murmours of your
mouth, with the thoughts of a God dying of love and pain for you; Desire not to
be pitied by men, or to be eased in your pain, but drink as Jesus Christ did,
the chalice quite pure, in all its bitterness^ and if you find that day no
occasion of suffering, either from your self, or others, mortify your self in
some thing, and make your self suffer, that you may no day fail to be the image
of Christ crucified.

4. At night at the end of your examen Kiss the 5. wounds of Jesus Christ with all imaginab^e tenderness and with all the sentiments of a heart pierced with
sorrow for its sins, and with love of a God, whose life they have taKen away.
It is not necessary to say any thing in making this adoration of the cross, the
heart alone ought to s^eaK there by its sighs and tears: but if one finds not
ones self touched, one may say an Ave Mary Kissing each wound, in memory of the
dolours of the sacred Virgin, and demand of our Savior, by his adorable head,
a lively and animated faith; by his sacred feet humility: by his right hand,
patience, by left hand, the love of our enemies: by the wound of his side, a
consummation in his love. In fine, apply the Crucifix to your senses, begging
of Jesus Christ, that he would sanctify them, and consecrate them to himself.
This practice of devotion may continue all the frydays of the year.

5. During the Day time, cast your eyes often upon Jesus crucified, but look
upon him sometimes with love, with respect or confidence, and with a lively
resentment of your sins: these casts are of so great merit before God, and so
capable of purifying a soul, that the holy fathers assure us, that they are
more agreeable to God then many fasts, alms, and other austeritys than one can
perform.

6. In fine, endeavor to overcome your self in something, and to surmount your
natural repugnances, to bridle your impatience, and not to follow the motion
of your humor, and that 5. different times in the day; to honor the 5. wounds
of Jesus Christ, to whom this sacrifice of mortification is more pleasing then
all the austeritys of the body that you can offer to him.

II. Hear with fruit the Sermons that are mad during Lent.
ONe ought to carry a heart thither well disposed by that fidelity, that
penance, and by that solitude, of which we have spoken in our general advices;
but in particular one ought

1. To go to a sermon with a sincere desire of profiting by it, and for this
end, in the beginning of it, we should demand this grace, both for our selves
and others.

2. You ought to hearken in the mean time with great attention, both to the
preacher which speaks to you exteriourly, and to the holy Ghost which speaks
interiourly to your soul: and open your soul and your heart to the motions of
grace, to the end^ that the truths which are preached to you, may be imprinted
and established in the bottom of your soul.

3. Receive the word of God with respect, from what mouth soever you hear it,
remembering that the truths of the Gospel were delivered to the world, and
converted it being preached in a plain simple style, and far remote from human
eloquence: and therefore that the less they are adorned, the more impression
they will make.

4. Never apply to another what the preacher says, but persuade your self, he
speaks to you alone.

5. Elevate your heart to God du^ing the Sermon, begging of him the grace to
practice what you hear, and for this end, keep your mind and senses very much
recollected.

6. When you go from the sermon, give not way presently to distraction of mind,
least the good seed sown in your heart may be choked by the hindrances of
affairs, or rooted up by the first temptation, but after having instructed you
in what his pleasure is you should do, beg him not to permit these verities to
prove your damnation for want of practice of them, and endeavor as occasion
serves, to remember them.

7. In fine, offer that day some good work, some a^mes, or some mortification,
that you may do, to obtain for the preacher the grace of touching some obdurate
sinner.

III. To do good works with the spirit of Christianity.
IT would be convenient you should take one day in the week, to vis^ the
prisoners, or the poor in the Hospital: but take care above a^ things, not do
to these holy action either out of custom, and without a^ interior spirit, or
out of custom, and without an interior spirit, or out o^ a pure natural
compassion, and therefore before you beging these visits,

1. Pass by some Church, and the^ demand the benediction of our Savior, and
beg of him that he would animate you with the spirit with which he used himself
to visit and comfort afflicted persons; and at the same time offer to him the
action you are going to perform, and go to the place you design to visit, with
modesty and recollection.

2. As soon as you are arrived there, look upon the poor and sick, as the
images of Jesus Christ; salute their good Angels, and beg of them, to inspire
you with good thoughts, so long as you shall be speaking with them.

3. And since they are not only often ignorant of what belongs to the duty of
a Christian, but always in affliction, entertain them always with some word of
instruction, particularly, concerning confession and communion, and likewise of
consolation and compassion, letting them know that you take part in their
sufferings, and giving them ho^es they shall one day receive a recompense for
them in heaven.

4. Accompany your alms with an actual desire to please God, and to assist
Jesus Christ in his members.

5. Shun all vanity and all reboundings of self-satisfaction that may spring
from this action, which you are to keep at secret as you can.

6. Overcome generously all she repugnance that you may have in approaching the
poor sick persons, and the better to overcome your self, affect rather to
approach the party, for whom you find your self to have the greatest natural
horror, provided his disease be not catching. Salute the blessed Sacrament,
returning from your visit, and beg like a poor body, of Jesus Christ, a
spiritual alms for your soul, by the the particular tenderness he has for
poor, and those that assist them.

8. In sin, eremember that the Alms done in this manner, is an excellent means
to please God, and to blot out your sins, and to purify your heart from all
engagements, to obtain for your selves suck particular favors as God imparts
to his friends, and to gain the heart of Jesus Christ, to ^ppease the wrath of
your Judge, to obtain the virtues you want, and to correct your imperfections.

Wherefore make a resolution never to deny any poor body, since he procures far
more for you toward the salvation of your soul, then you give him for the
relief of his body.

A practice for the Octave of the blessed Sacrament.
ONe must honor the state and condition of Jesus Christ in the blessed
Sacrament. 1. In the morning, by offering him your actions, thereby to return
him thanks for this great benefit. 2. by making every hour some aspiration to
Jesus Christ who is in the blessed Sacrament on the Altar, with an ardent
desire to unite himself to you 3. by reciting every day the Office of the
blessed Sacrament, and performing our communions during this time with an
extraordinary preparation of faith, confidence, humility, and love, in
mortifying your tongue and heart in the sallys of your humor, because bot^ the
one and the other have the honor to receive Jesus Christ.

It is good every day to spend some time extraordinary before the blessed
Sacrament.

So that the first day you may visi^ and honor him as a victim that sacrifices
himself for you, and you may remain in his presence, in the spirit of a
sacrifice, begging of him to make you a victim of his love, and that he would
destroy in you what soever is displeasing to him.

The second day you may honor his annihilations in the Eucharist, and look
upon him as a God humbled so low as to put himself under the form of a little
bread, for love of you, and you may remain quite annihilated in his presence,
begging him to destroy in you all your pride, and that he would make you love a
hidden life

The third day you may honor his love, Which makes him give himself Wholly to
you, that he may entirely transform you into himself, and you may consecrate to
him all the inclinations and desires of your heart.

The fourth day, you may honor him as your father, that feeds your with his
own proper substance, and remain before him, in the spirit of confidence in his
goodness.

The fifth day, you may honor his life of consummation, which obliges him, his
own self, to loose his sacramental life and being, and to be destroyed to
consummate our perfection in our souls, and beg of him to destroy in you all
that is not God. The 6 7. and 8. th days, you may honor the virtues which he
practices upon the Altar, and beg the imitation of them, as, of his exact
obedience, his humility his patience his prayers, or continual application to
his father, his charity for the salvation of souls, his love, his solitude, his
mortificaiion: and endeavor each day, to imitate some one of these virtues.

RULES OF FIDELITY, to arrive to an eminent perfection,
I. Fidelity in the general examen, consists,
1. IN avoiding the least sin or imperfection, and all things that either
displease, or at least, do not please God.

2. In performing the least spiritual and indifferent actions, with an
interior spirit, not influenced by humor, custom, or vanity.

3. In suffering all that gives pain to mind or body with resignation,
fidelity, and love: this is the matter or subject of the general examen.

II. Fidelity in the particular examen, consists,
1. IN observing the very least rules prescribed by obedience.

2. In doing every thing in the moment prescribed by obedience.

3. In overcoming the repugnance of our humor, in all occasions, even in the
least things.

III. Fidelity in the continual examen, or vigilance over ones self, Which
neither allows nor pardons in ones self, any natural satisfaction Whatever,
consists,
1. IN watching over our senses, to cut off thence, all ill, unprofitable,
human, or even but merely natural satisfactions.

2. In watching over our minds, to annihilate all considerations or
reflections, that are human, whether they proceed from vanity, curiosity, or
impertinence.

3. In watching over our hearts, to stifle all human motions, that is to say,
all over ardent, or over eager desires of any thing whatsoever, all immoderate
joy, or tenderness; all fondness, all relish or satisfaction which one may take
in any thing one does; all sensible pleasure that may cause a heart to live to
its self. It Is in the fidelity of these three sorts of examens, that consists a
perfect self-denial, true devotion, solid virtue, and all sanctity.

FROM THE ASCENSION to whitsontide.
I.
ONe must enter into an exterior retreat, with the holy Virgin, and the
Apostles, casting off all unnecessary business, visits or unprofitable
discourses, and keeping the spirit of sweetness, and charity with our
neighbor, but above all, we ought to be careful to join thereto, an interior
retreat, keeping our minds sequestered from all vain and curious thoughts, or
all unprofitable reflections upon our selves or others, employing ones mind and
heart in frequent aspirations and sighs addressed to God, to demand his holy
spirit, which to obtain, we must unite them with the interior dispositions and
prayers of the holy Virgin and the Apostles.

II.
SAy every day, the Veni creator, at the end of the book, and make seven
elevations of mind, to demand the seven gifts of the holy Ghost; the
disengagement from creatures, the victory over our humors, which is the life
of our own spirit opposed to that of the holy Ghost. Make one elevation of mind
to the eternal father, another to the son, a third to the holy Ghost, a 4.th.
to the holy Virgin, a 5. th. to the Apostles, a 6. th. to your good Angel, and
the last to S. Phillip Nery who reeived with such fullnessh the, oly Ghost upon
the day of Pentecost.

These elevations of mind ought to be made with ardent desires of obtaining
this singular grace. Above all, beg a total change of your heart, and beseech
the holy Ghost, that he would cause you to live a life wholly supernatural,
and to die to all the longing and and hankering appetites of the human and
sensual life.

VENI CREATOR OR The Hymn of the holy Ghost.
COme Creator, Sp'rit divine,
Visit now the souls of thine;
Fill with grace distilled from heaven,
Hearts, to whom thou life have given;
Whom the comforter we call,
Gift of God transcending all,
Living spring, fire, fervent love,
Ghostly unction from above:
Sev'nfold grace thou do impart,
And Gods right hand finger art:
Thou, the fathers promise, which
Tongues with language does enrich,
Kindle light in every sense,
Love into our hearts dispense:
Strengthen what in flesh is frail,
With a virtue cannot fail:
Drive away our mortal foe,
Peace upon us soon bestow:
As a guide before us shine,
That all vice We may decline.
By thee may it so be done,
That we father know and Son,
And in thee believe, who do
Flow from both, the holy Ghost.
Glorious may the father reign,
And the Son who rose again,
So the holy Paraclite,
During Ages infinite.
III.
ADd a quarter of an hour to your ordinary time of prayer and as much to your
time of silence, to think in the presence of God, of the great affects which
his spirit works in a well disposed heart, in order to the making an absolute
charge in it, as he did in the hearts of his Apostles, and the better to
entertain your self with a meditation upon some one of the gifts of the holy
Ghost, as you will find them explicated in some of your book on that subjet;
Make also a particular visit to the blessed Sacrament every day, to demand of
Jesus Christ, the fullness of his spirit.

IV.
AVoid tepidity, negligence, or humor in your actions, as faults particularly
opposite to the fervor of that divine love which the holy Ghost in kindles in
a soul; and watch over your self, to be able to discern the motions of his
grace, be faithful in following them, and do to thing against the light which
God gives you to avoid any thing: because that would be to afflict the holy
Ghost.

The practice of your aspirations during this holy time, may be done after this
or some such like manner.

Father of mercy, send me your comforting spirit, that may give peace to my
soul my Jesus give me the spirit of understanding and wisdom, that may make me
know you with a lively faith, and that I may feel your presence within my
heart, and that I may relish nothing but you alone: O holy Ghost, heart of the
blessed Trinity, substantial love of the Father and the son, come and
inlighten my mind with the truths of faith, animate my heart with the flames of
pure love; come and strengthen me in my weakness, raise me up after my
fallings, and purify me from all hankering after, or fondness of creatures: O
love of my God, be you the soul of my soul, be you my life, grant that I may
die wholly to my self, and live wholly to you.

The seven gifts of the H. Ghost.
THe gift of Wisdom.
The gift of Understanding.
The gift of Knowledge.
The gift of Counsel.
The gift of Fortitude.
The gift of Piety or Godliness.
The gift of the Fear of God.
FOR THE OCTAVE OF WHITSONTIDE.
Apply your self every day, to know, demand, and practice one of the seven
gifts of the holy Ghost, to the end that he may purifiy, and Sanctify with
these seven divine habits, all the affections of your soul.

THE.I. DAY. The gift of Wisdom.
LEt the subject of your prayer, be the qualities of this gift, which are (1.)
to make us relish God, and all that unites us to him; (2.) to give us an
extreme disgust of all pleasures of the senses, and all natural satisfaction;
(3.) to make us esteem, love, and search with passion, sufferings, disgrace,
and abjection, of which we have such a horror; (4.) to make an entire
separation of a heart, from all fondness of creatures, as also from all that is
sensual in devotion, and from all that is not God.

Come o holy Ghost, come and enlighten my mind with this gift of wisdom, come
and destroy in me the love of the world: grant that I may take no relish in any
thing but in God, that God may be all to me, and creatures may be nothing:
grant that I may love contempt which my Savior so esteemed, and that the cross
may be the only o^ject of my love.

2. Beg often during the first day, that is the day of Pentecost, the gift of
wisdom, which consists in loving spiritual things, make an extraordinary
visit to the blessed Sacrament, to beg this day as well as throughout the whole
Octave, the Office of the holy Ghost, and in the morning after your prayers,
say, veni Creator, as in the end of this book, and give every day of the
Octave, some little alms to the poor, to obtain the gifts of the holy Ghost,
whom the holy Chruch styles the Father of the poor.

THE II. DAY. The Gifts of Understanding.
1. COnsider in your prayer the effects of this gift, which are (1.) to make us
love what we believe, and to render our faith so lively and strong, that it may
make such an impression upon our minds, as if we saw the objects of what we
believe, so that a soul enlightened with this gift, is lost in the respect and
love it finds, in gods presence, in prayer, and before the blessed Sacrament,
as if it saw God with its eyes; and this gift works the same effect in the
soul, as the light of glory does in the souls of the Blessed* It sees God in
the bosom of it, and feels his presence after so intimate and certain a
manner, that it is rather a possession, then a knowledge of God. (2.) This gift
makes us see God in all things, and makes all things carry us to God; So that a
soul which is enlightened with it, considers nothing that is good, rich or
perfect in creatures, but only i^ God, as in the source of all bounty and
goodness: It is full of the Idea of the greatness of God, It penetrates
chr^stian verities with a supernatural view It discovers in abjection, and in
the cross, beauties unknown to sensual souls, and depises all earthly goods

2. O my God dissipate the darkne^ of my mind, by the light of your holy
spirit; grant I may judge no more o^ things according to their appearances and
according to sense, but according to truth, and according to the supernatural
view of grace, that all things that I understand, may carry me to you that all
creatures may disappear in the presence of their Creator, to the end that God
alone may take up my mind, which is made, to know him, and my heart which was
created, to ove him.

3. Observe that which is marked the first day after meditation, to wit, the
frequent aspirations during the whole day, taken out of the affections marked
in your meditation; The visit of the blessed Sacrament, The office of the holy
Ghost, The veni Creator, to obtain this Gift, and do the same the other days of
the Octave.

THE III. DAY. The Gift of Knowledge.
1. COnsider that the gift of knowledge when it enlightens a soul, it makes it
judge of things, as God himself does, that is to say, it makes it esteem
nothing great but the service of God, to fear nothing but his displeasure, to
love nothing but what makes us more agreeable in his eyes.

2. This gift enlightens us in the knowledge of the Crucifix, that is to say,
it makes us behold with respect, all the crosses that God sends us, proceeding
from the cross deify'd in Jesus Christ, and therefore makes us far from
complaining of them; it receives them with grateful acknowledgement, and
thanks our Savior for them, as for a singular favor, it thinks it self more
happy in suffering a contempt, an affliction, an injury, a persecution, an
affront, a refusal a drieness, a sensible dereliction of Go^ in prayer, more
then in possessing the whole earth; wherefore the so^ thus enlightened with the
gift o^ knowledge, when any pain happen to it, goes immediately and casts i^
self on its knees before a Crucifix, t^ receive its cross as from the hand o^
God, with respect, submission, and love

2. O my Jesus! O that the beam^ of your cross were more known to the world! O
how do they contemn the holy relics of your cross, which you offer to us
shut up in the pain of this life! O cross of my Savior. O how often have I
adored you i^ my Crucifix which is your image, and despised in my pains, which
are you^ true effects, and, as it were, your s^ many other selves!

THE IV. DAY. The Gift of Counsel.
1. COonsider that this gift carrys us 1. to consult God in all things that we
undertake; (2.) to do nothing but by the motions of grace, or according to the
maxims of the Gospel. (3.) never to neglect inspirations and interior
admonitions of the holy Ghost, but readily and faithfully to follw them. (4.)
to give good counsel to such as ask our advice; (5.) never to follow that
which vanity, humor or self love counsels us to do but to do that only which
the spirit of grace and the love of our abjection inspires us.

2. O my God! how much reason have I to fear that I have been the cause of the
sin and damnation of many persons by my ill counsels? Perhaps at this present,
there are some in hell which would have been in heaven, if I had counseled
them in their despair, assisted them in their poverty or withdrawn them by my
good counsels from the occasion of sin. O how many have I ruined by my bad
example! What reproaches will these damned make me at the day of Judgment! O
holy Ghost, how sorry am I, that I have so often neglected thy counsels to
follow the sentiment of self love! O that I could be so faithful for the
future, as never to do any thing contrary to your ^nspirations, but in all
things, to follow your counsel.

THE V. DAY. The Gift of Fortitude.
1. COnsider the effects of this gift, which are (1.) to render our selves so
perfect masters of our humors, of our choler, and of our passions, that we may
crush, and stifle their revolts in their birth; (2.) to give us invincible
courage in our pains, never to permit our selves to be oppressed by them, but
to remain faithful in them; (3.) to give us stedfastness in our good
resolutions, and courage, constantly to follow that which we have undertaken
for the glory of God, and the salvation of souls, inspite of all
contradictions, contempt, or oppositions of creatures; (4.) to establish all
our happiness in sufferings, or the persecutions that we undergo for the good
we would do.

2. O Jesus humbled and despised! o that your affronts would render my
contempts pleasing to me! And that your annihilations would give me courage to
suffer my self to be reduced to nothing for your sake, in the esteem of all
men! Holy spirit, grant that my mind may find its strength in the weakness of
my body, that I may never fall under the burden of the cross. O how I am
confounded to see that there needs only a rude word, a contradiction, nay a
nothing, to make me fall into impatience! It seems to me when I go from my
prayer, that I want no force to do and suffer all things, but how weak am I,
when the occasion presents it self! Give me grace to suffer all things from
others, and to make me suffer my self.

THE VI. DAY. The Gift of Piety.
1. COnsider that this gift inspires a soul with true devotion, which consists
(1.) in performing with fervor and promptitude, all that God desires of us
(2.) in loving prayer, the exercises of piety, the frequenting of the
Sacraments, solitude, reading, and recollection of mind, in the presence of
God. This gift imprints in the heart so lively and animated a tenderness for
the love of God, tha^ one is ready to do and suffer all things to please him.

2. Ought I o my God, so often to bear the cross, and yet never to bear it
well? O that a soul were as knowing in the science of Saints, to esteem, love,
and cherish crosses as worldlings shun and reject them.

O Cross, o holy Cross! how can you be all my consolation and comfort in my
life? how can I look upon you at the day of judgment with confidence, if I
receive you not with respect in this world, suffering my pains with submission,
silence, and love?

THE VII. DAY. The Gift of the Fear of God.
1. COnsider that this gift imprints in our hearts a filial and respectfull
fear of God, which makes us apprehend the least sin, because it is displeasing
to God, and not because of the punishment it deserves; and that pierces a soul
in all places, with an holy respect and an humble dread before the divine
majesty of God which is entirely present to it.

2. O how well do I conceive, O my God, how this constant and habitual fear of
a soul does purify, untye, and render it perfect? in a small time. O holy
Ghost, bestow upon me this wholesome fear, which may make me apprehend the
lightest infidelity, and which may assure me of a happy eternity.

3. This gift unites us intimately to God in prayer, it recollects all the
senses, it stops all the powers of the heart, in the sight and perfection of
this sole object, of which the soul experiences an intimate presence, rather
then a knowledge of it.

4. O holy Spirit! source of love and bounty, the adorable origin of the
sanctification of our hearts, inflame them with the fire of thy divine charity,
let us see and taste, how sweet our Lord is; give us the spirit of recollection,
and of prayer, which may carry us to do all things, as in gods sight, and yet
recall us into our selves, there to adore and love a God, who abides in our
hearts, as in his temple, and sanctifies them, by the communication of his
spirit.

A PRACTICE OF MENTAL PRAYER very easy for all sorts of persons.
The whole method of prayer consists in four things.
FIrst, in the consideration or view of the truth we meditate:

Secondly, in the application which the mind makes of this truth, to its self,
to be moved with it, and to put it in practice:

Thirdly, in the affections which the heart produces at the sight of this truth:

Fourthly, in the good resolutions which it makes in putting it in practice,
and the fervent petition it makes to God, to obtain it by the intercession of
the blessed Virgin.

HOW THE MEMORY IS to be imploye^d befote prayer.
First, an Act of Faith upon the presence of God.
MY God, I believe al your seeing eye beholds me; you, before whom the very
Angels tremble with an humble dread, and in whose presence I am as a pure
nothing: I behold you with a profound respect, as my God, with a confidence, as
my father, and with fear, as my judge.

Second Act of Adoration.
I adore you o my God, as my creator, and as my soverain Judge, and to whom I
must one day render an account of this very action I am about to perform.

Third Act of Petition.
I beseech you to grant me your grace to execute this day what you are about to
inspire me with in this prayer, pardon the sins and imperfections I may commit
in it, and the distraction that may take up, or hinder my mind in the due
performance of it.

HOW THE MIND IS TO employ it self during prayer.
First, consider the truth proposed, which is done by a certain view or act of
faith; repeat strongly, and sweetly in your mind, the truth of that matter or
subject which most of all moves you, then after, rather by a simple view
thereof, then by any long ratiocinations thereon, make an act of faith, with
all the fervency you are able.

Yes, o my God I firmly believe what you have now taught me in this truth, but,
animate my faith, and convert it into practice, that it may not one day serve
to my greater damnation.

Secondly, reflect on your self, pausing some time on each point.
Well, o my soul, what hinders thee from practicing this virtue? it is thy duty
to practice it, it is in thy power to perform it, God ordains it, thy Jesus
urges its performance thy salvation depends upon it, thou ought from this
very day forward, to practice it, why will thou not? what hinders thee? o I see
very well what it is, it is such and such a hankering, such a vanity, such a
curiosity, such a passionate word, such and such occasions: what? ought a
creature to rob thee of thy Creator? will thou always live unfaithful? what,
will thou never as long as thou live, be entirely gods? and how then can
thou hope to be entirely his in Eternity? my God, I am yours, no my dear Jesus,
no toy or trifle shall any more hinder me from being entirely yours, I will not
any more rob you of a heart which is so justly yours, and which besides, has
cost you so dear.

THIRDLY, WHAT AFFECTIONS the heart is to be employed in.
YEs, o my God, yes I am resolved to love you a thousand times better then my
self; I am resolved to be all yours, as you are wholly mine: I have horror of
whatsoever is displeasing to you, I desire nothing more then to express my love
to you, and to that end, I desire to imitate you this day, in what I have
learnt in this med^tation: I conjure you, my Jesus, to put me in mind of these
lessons, when any occasion of practice offers it self.

Resolutions for the time to come.
I am resolved, my God against and from this very present, I break off entirely
with the d^fect, which I perceive is the source of many others in me: I will
have you alone to be the absolute master of my heart, it is yours, o my God, it
is wholly yours.

DIVERSE AFFECTIONS which may be made in time of prayer.
1. Of Confidence.
MY God, since I find my self so weak and inconstant in my resolutions, grant,
I may execute them as effectually as you have assisted me to make them: I
expect all from your goodness, my Jesus, and confide as much in the assistance
of your grace, as I diffide in my own weakness.

2. Love.
O my Jesus, o my amiable father, o infinite goodness, which has loved me from
all eternity, and which daily bestows infinite graces and favors upon me, and
which has destined me for Paradise: ah, how can I live without loving you!
shall I never leave offending you, who never leave of doing me good! How can I
behold you my Jesus, how can I see you dying with love and sorrow for me, and
not live entirely to you, I have a heart for no other and then to love you a
mind only to Know you, and yet I love and think of nothing less then you: o,
that I had, never thus displeased you!

3. Resignations to the difficulties we meet with in prayer.
I am confounded, o my God, to see my self so insensible of your love, and so
little touched with the truths which I meditate: you see, o Lord, my miseries
and extreme poverty: I embrace it with my whole heart, I submit to your
pleassure; I sacrifice my self to all the severities of your justice; I am
contented never more to taste the sweetness of your presence, so that I may but
have the whole fruit and effect of it: it is but just, that you should retire
your self, and leave a heart so unfaithful to you, and which has withdrawn it
self a hundred times from you: revenge your self, o my God, and satisfy your
justice, I desire no other satisfaction but to see you satisfied: and I am sure
you are more pleased to see me contented with my weakness, and to suffer with
peace in your presence, then if I were filled with consolation.

ADVICE OF IMPORTANCE, how to make ones prayer with fruit and facility.
1. For distractions of mind.
AS soon as you find your self distracted, presently make a return to God. O my
God, let me be all yours, all for you, and wholly in your presence: when you
have done this, make no reflection at all upon your distractions, either to
examine them, or to disquiet your self. You may sometimes remain before God,
all quite overwhelmed with confusion, to see how little respect you bear to his
presence.

2. For desolations of heart.
The more you feel of tediousness, of oppression, or disgust, the more you must
force your self to remain with courage, respect, and submission, before God,
and for this reason, keeip your self always upon your knees, your hands joined,
and your eyes humbly cast down, with a submission of mind and heart, to the
pain you suffer, and so sacrifice your self generously, without reserve, to the
rigor of the divine justice: give no way to this oppression, permit your self
to be crucified by all those wanderings of your mind, and by all those disquiets
and troubles of your heart, and believe that in this state, God requires
nothing else, then that you suffer with patience, humility, and submission to
his will.

3. For prayer of affection.
1. If you find difficulty in meditating upon your subject, employ your self in
affections, after you have made an act of faith upon that truth which moves you
most; but after having also formed an affection conformable to your subject, or
to the inspiration God shall give you upon it, remain in silence for a little
while, in gods presence, that it may take the deeper impression, and never
pass forward to a second affection, before your heart has penetrated, and
remained content in the first; because when one makes light, and hasty acts,
they make very light, or no impression upon the will.

3. For the prayer of Silence.
First, if the only presence of God, which you behold within you, does take
you wholly up, and recollect you, which causes a great peace and calm over your
heart, be not so unfaithful, as to disturb, or trouble this strong and
efficacious operation of God, by your own thoughts and affections, which would
make you deviate from this respect which you ow to so great a God, who makes
you feel his presence by a sweet and inward inspiration that recollects you:
then content, and please your self with what he works in you, abandoning your
self entirely into his hands, and put no obstacle to whatsoever he shall work
in you. You are all, my God, and I am nothing; these two words will suffice,
whilst you shall remain in this sacred silence, and when that is past, return
to your matter.

Secondly, accustom your self according to the counsel of Jesus Christ, to
iscourse little in prayer, that is to say, that your mind be contented with a
simple view of the truths you meditate, without tiring your self with long
discourses, especially, if these views make more impression in your heart then
discourses, and that you have long before, meditated these truths.

Thirdly, let not your will dilate it self too much in its affections; but let
it reduce them insensibly to holy, and fervent aspirations, which your heart
may form toward God. If God gives you any sensible grace or favor, receive it
with humility, without reflecting upon it, or giving you^ self up too much to
it, and unite you^ self always to the Author of thos^ graces, and not to the
graces themselves

Fourthly, act when God acts not, but remain silent when he speaks, and be not
like those souls who remain whole hours in pure idleness of min^ expecting that
God would touch o^ move them, or of those who alway^ speak to God: this
idleness is not tha^ which we call the prayer of silence, which keeps a soul
elevated above the motions of anger and self-love, which sustains it,
recollects it, and penetrates it with a holy respect in gods presence, and
animates all the actions of the mind, with his grace.

Advice how to draw fruit out of prayer.
The reasons why one profits not by prayer, are.
FIrst, because one does not sufficiently penetrate the truths one meditates
upon.

Secondly, because one makes not ^cts, with such fervor and affection as one
ought.

Thirdly, because one makes reso^utions after a slack and general manner.

Fourthly, because one stays not ^ong enough upon every affection, and that one
makes them after a slight manner.

Fifthly, because one gives too much way to the disgust and pain one finds ^n
prayer, thinking it lost time, and that it is altogether unprofitable, that one
imagines ones self to do nothing, when it is evident, that to suffer this
affliction before God, with humility, ^s to make a good prayer.

Sixthly, because one soon forget the good resolutions made in prayer, instead
of often renewing them by thinking of them in the day, and chiefly at such time
when one is in the occasions of performing them.

Now, to profit in prayer, one ought first, to be free, and have ones heart
disengaged; secondly, to recollect one self often in the day, as in gods
presence; Tihrdly, to mortify ones senses and passions, upon all occasions:
Fourthly, to retire ones self from company, and to love retirement: In fine,
one ought to prepare ones self for it with care, in time of it, to conserve
ones self with great reverence and respect, in gods presence, and not dissipate
or distract ones self soon after it.

THE CONVERSION OF A SOUL TO GOD.
ELevate thy self, o my soul, to thy Creator, and deferr no longer thy
conversion, tho but for a moment: what is past, is gone, what is to come, is
not in thy power, and thou art master only of the present, which is but a
moment, given thee for no other end, then to serve God, and to gain eternity.
Conceive well these words, one God, one moment, one eternity attends thee: An
eternity, which either gives all, or takes all from thee for ever; a God, whom
thou so little servest; a moment, which thou make so ill use of; an eternity,
which thou hazardest. O God! o moment! o eternity! o God, my heart desires
thee, my heart seeks thee, to give thee it self entirely, to subject it self to
thee, and fill it self with thee; I beseech thee, to take and receive it in to
thy possession, and b^nish from it all sin, all ties to cre^tures, and all
inordinate love to m^self, that I may serve thee so faithfully, that I may
merit to possess the^ eternally.

A CHRISTIAN CONDUCT, Whereby persons, Whose vocation engages them in the
world, may therein work out their salvation.
1. SAy your prayers night and morning, with fervency and devotion* make a
firm, and peremptory resolution in the morning, not to commit on purpose, or
deliberately, any sin; to do all you can, to please God, and to do nothing
unprofitable for eternity. Examine your self every night, about your ordinary
failings the sallies of your humors, your detractions, and your laziness in
gods service; then consider with sorrow, the abuses you have made of his
graces, and the ill use of those crosses he has that day sent you; reflect upon
the confusion and regret you will one day have, for your faults, when you shall
appear before God; and consider, that perhaps, there is not more then an hour
between you and eternity: As near as you can, say your prayers in public every
night, where take care, that all your family be present.

2 After your morning prayer make a quarter, or half an hour of mental prayer,
according to your Directours advice; take care to make it with fervency upon
some certain subject which you may have read, in Granade, Point, or Mico's
Meditations: or if You understand French, in the Meditations of Abely, Busee,
Hayneufe, Nouet, or Crasset which are very moving and instructive: in so doing,
you ought to maKe all your good resolutions to avoid the sin you are naturally
most inclined to, and to practice the virtue you meditate of: But make these
resolutions in particular, not in general, and take care to foresee the
occasions of practicing them. In the beginning, look upon what is most moving
in the matter you meditate on; and then apply it to your self and see whether
you practice it: be confounded and sorry, that you do not do so, and resolve
that day, to put it in execution; and as you ought a^ways to diffide in your
self, beg of our Savior by the intercession of the blessed Virgin, that you
may put your good endeavors in practice.

3. Having dressed your self, and taken care about your houshold-affairs, go
strait to mass, without deferring gods service to the last minute of the
morning. Above all things, take care of speaking in the Church, but keep your
self there with that respect is due to your God, and to your judge: say your
vocal prayers, after you have offered to God, the holy sacrifice of the mass,
in honor of his supreme majesty, in thanks for all the favors you have
received of him, for pardon of your sins, and for the repose of such souls in
Purgatory, as are your relations or friends: but now and then, interrupting a
moment of your devotions, offer them to God by the hands of Jesus Christ
himself immolated upon the Altar for your sake, and unite your intentions with
his, whereby he offers himself as a victime for your salvation: from Sanctus to
the Elevation, think of the mysteries of the passion of Jesus Christ, with
sorrow for your sins which occasioned it, and with a purpose to suffer
something that day, for a God who has suffered so much for you: At the
Elevation, adore him, and offer him to his Eternal father, sacrifice your self
to his justice, and at the Pater noster, continue your vocal prayers to the
end of mass.

4. Being returned home, apply your self to your domestic affairs, from time
to time, offering to God your actions, and if you have any leisure, in the
morning, or after dinner, bettween one and two of the clock, read in some
spiritual book, for a quarter of an hour, with attention and desire of
profiting, in the Evening, whilst you receive or give visits, take care not to
take part with those that speak ill of their neighbors, nor to speak ill of
them your self; and now and then reflect, that God hears all you say, and that
one day, you must render him account. If any person happens to speak to you
something coldly or rudely, curb the sallies of your resentment, and endeavor
to take no notice of it; and without troubling your self about what the world
will say of it, think only of that which God, who hears all that passes, will
say to you at the day of judgment. If you hear any loose or impious discourse,
endeavor presently to show, by putting on such an indifferent, cold, or
serious countenance thereupon, that the discourse does not please you,
remembering, that should you testifiy any satisfaction you take in it, you would
thereby make your self guilty before God, of whatever is displeasing to him in
such ill discourses.

5. Take care never to be idle when you are at home, but always have something
to employ your self in, knowing that you are to give account to God, for all
the time you lose: when you reprehend your servants, remember to do it, (1.)
with reason, for some considerable fault; (2) in few words, and without
repeating the same things over and over again, to please your humor: 3. when
you find your self moved with passion, leave off saying any thing: (4.) do not
often find fault, nor chide upon all occasions, for little or nothing: (5.^
turn them not away at the years end, upon pretense of their ill humou^, or
other light faults, except you should find them unfaithful, or of ill life, or
keep ill company; for then, you are obliged to part with them; and persuade
your self, it is enough to endanger your own soul, to turn away your servants
every year, except for these 2. weighty reasons, or to lessen their wages for
such faults or omissions, which they unadvisedly commit, making them pay the
overplus of what they bought too dear, or for, things laid aside or lost, by
chance, and without their fault: once more believe, that it is an injury to your
own conscience, and will endanger your salvation, thus to defraud your servants
of any part of their wages.

6 Have all the respect, submission, and complaisance for your husband, your
father, or mother, which you ow them never contradict them with obstinacy:
never give them any rude; sl^ghting, or disgustfull language: believe that the
great secret how to live with them in peace, and esteem, is to comply with
them, when you find them in choler, or angry, and to seem to be of their minds,
and to follow their wills and inclinations, and ever accommodate your self to
their humor, when they desire nothing contrary to the will of God. Say every
day, S. Joseph's Letanies, to obtain this peace so necessary for a well ordered
family, offer to God, the trouble and discontents, the cross humors of a
husband, a father, or mother, may occasion; and offer the patience with which
you suffer it, for their conversion. Make it your chief virtue and greatest
care, to stay at home, to look after your servants, and to breed up your
children; because this is the chief thing God will examine you about, at the
day of judgment. Permit not in your family, any blasphemous or debauched
persons, for fear of drawing the curse of God upon it. Remember to give the
example of patience, mildness, charity and devotion, to your family, as you
ought to do.

7. In the Evening, about four or five of the clock, go to Church, to beg at
least, or to receive the benediction of the blessed Sacrament when it is given;
or if you be in the Country, to your Chapel, and say your beads there with
devotion, together with the Evensong of our blessed Lady; and read there also
with attention, what you will find in the Christian thoughts allotted for that
day, or a chapter in Thomas a Kempis; making from time to time, a serious
reflection upon what you read, and beg grace to perform it.

8. Be nor of the number of those who sit up almost all night, and sleep the
next morning till eleven or twelve of the clock; but have a certain time
allotted for rising, and going to bed, as much as you are able, and remember,
that a christian life ought to be regular.

9. Flatter not your self too much concerning your alms, since you are obliged
to give such as may be proportionable to your fortune: take care that alms be
given to the poor in the Country, by giving them corn; and do the same in town,
either to prisoners, or bashful poor; and know for certain, that a person who
is rich, cannot save his soul by doing small alms, and that one is obliged in
conscience, and under pain of great sin, to assist the poor in their pressing
necessities, which are but too frequent; and that you may easily know, if you
will but take the pains a little to inform your self; that to defer, or lessen
the salaries of poor tradesmen, is visibly to damn ones self: and think not
that your poor vassalls can give a hundred days work exacted of them, did not
the fear of their Lords force them to it, and therefore, doubt not, but it is
your duty to pay them.

10. For your devotions, perform them at least every 8. th day, or even twice a
week, if your Confessor judge it fit: but remember to deprive your self the
night before, of your ordinary divertisement of play, and apply your self to
make your communions as well as you can, according to the following directions.

11. For confession, endeavor (1.) to examine well your conscience, and to
particularise your sins, especially those which you commit out of custom, as
choler and detraction; consider also the evil that you have not hindered to be
committed in your house, and the good you have not performed, as you might have
done; for example, to reconcile your neighbors, to give alms to the poor in
great necessity, to neglect your spiritual exercises out of sloth, or to
divert, or let fall a detraction: (2.) after this, the better to conceive a
true sorrow and sincere contrition, propose to your self, all the motives that
are capable to excite in you an actual and interior disengagement from sin;
without which, your confessions ^ave not worth any thing: wherefore, regard,
and regret your sins, as the effects of the greatest ingratitude against the
infinite goodness and bounty of God toward you, for all the graces and favors
he has bestowed upon you, and all the benefits you have received from his
hands; and deplore them as the greatest affronts committed against his supreme
majesty, as a contempt of his greatness, and as a trampling under foot his most
precious blood; and casting your eyes upon a crucifix, employ your mind at the
same time, upon the following thoughts

Behold what my sins have made my Jesus suffer! See to what extremity his love
for me, has brought him! ought I to have displeased so amiable a Deity? ought I
to continue to shed his most precious blood? ought I to not leave off
affronting him, who never leaves off doing me all the good he can? O my God!
what a regret and sorrow have I for having offended you! o that I might ratther
undergo a thousand deaths, then ever more displease you! (2.) sincerely confess
your sins, saying those you remember, and in short, mixing no unprofitable
discourse with them, and taking notice in a few words of the necessary
circumstances, avoiding all long and unprofitable stories, by which, one makes
known rather another sins, then ones own; in which, they do ill whilst they
think to do well; and believe it as a certain truth, that the shorter, more
exact, and clear your confession is, the better, and more perfect it is; and to
make it so, forget not, as much as you are able, to express the number of your
sins, and whether you have committed them with foresight or reflection; to take
notice also, whether you staid long in them, or only a short time, or in fine,
whether you gave full consent to them, or were negligent in rejecting, or
withdrawing your self from them; and never fail to take notice whether your
sins are concerning any light matter, or of moment: In the third place, when you
receive absolution, recollect your mind as in gods presence, renew your sorrow
for your sins, and persuade your self, that it is the blood of Jesus Christ that
purifies your soul, and sanctifies it and gives it a new force not to committ
any more sins: In the fourth place, after confession, retire your self alone,
put your self in spirit, at the feet of Christ crucified, and consider him all
covered with wounds and blood, and expiring with love and grief, for your sake:
(1.) Give him thanks with all your heart, that after having so often pardoned
your sins, he has had but now, once more the bounty for you, to pardon them
again; and blush with shame, and confusion in his presence, that you have so
often fallen into the same: (2.^ Offer to the eternal father, the blood and
sufferings of his son Jesus Christ, for penance and satisfaction for your
sins, and for the pain due to them: and then unite with his, the penance you
are about to perform: (3.) Perform it with attention, sorrow, and confusion, as
a criminal that acknowledges and regrets his crime; make an ardent and lively
resolution, to avoid all sin, particularly, that which you are most subject to;
and remember, (if you communicate not the same day that you confess,) not to
let loose your mind after confession, but to keep an exact watch over your
self, not to fall into your ordinary imperfections.

12. For holy Communion, take a particular care to dispose your self very well
for it, and to improve much by it; because there is nothing more dangerous then
to approach it with indifference, and out of formality, and not to grow better
by it; Therefore, from the very minute after your prayer, morning and night,
think, that you are to receive your God that same day, and conceive an ardent
desire to receive him worthily. To prepare your self Well for Communion, (1.)
Endeavor to excite in your self, a lively faith of the presence of Jesus
Christ in the blessed Sacrament, and consider very well these three things; I
go to receive my God, my Savior, and my judge; therefore, with what respect,
ought I to approach my? God ywith what love ought I to approach my Savior!
with what confusion ought I to present my self before my judge! O my God, may
Sovereign Lord, who are you? and who am I, that I should dare to appear in your
presence? But, o my Jesus, my amiable Savior, o how much fervency have I to
unite my self so to you, as to make you absolute master of my heart! O
Souveraign judge of all mankind, how is it possible that I should dare to
receive you within my self, who have so often provoked your anger! O my God
receive your self in me, because I am unworthy to approach you: o my Savior,
offer your self within me to your father, and at the same time, sacrifice to
your father, and to your divine justice, all that is criminal or human within
me: O my judge, condemn me not for my tepidity: O my God, one word alone from
you, suffices to make me a Saint, to heal all the maladies of my soul, who am
unworthy to receive you within my self: O my Savior, how sorry am I, that I
have ever offended you, and caused you to suffer so much for my sake! O my
judge, how does your presence pierce my heart with horror and confusion, when
I think that I go to receive him who one day will judge me concerning the
action I am about to perform, and who bears in his hands my eternal happiness,
or misery! (2.) Endeavor to conceive a firm confidence, a fervent love, and an
ardent desire to receive Jesus Christ, because you ought to be convinced, that
it is the same Savior, who is so charitable and so good, as to heal all those
that approach him with faith, and have recourse to him with confidence: (3.^
Excite in your self, an ardent desire to receive your sovereign good, your
redeemer, and deliverer, who are a slave to your passions; your Physician, who
are sick; your Savior, who are in danger of perishing: (4.) About all,
remember, after you have received your God, to recollect your self for some
time, eith^r casting your self at his feet, with S. Magdelen, to hear his
instructions, or adoring him with the Leper in the Gospel, and saying with
him, Lord, if you please, you can cure me; or in fine, consecrating your self
entirely to him and begging of him to take possession of your heart, and of
your body, to unite and transform you into himself, and to become for the
future, the soul of all your actions, and the rule and model of your life, that
it may be he that lives in you, and by you, that all you do, may be animated
with his spirit. If you find your self much transported by the sweetness and
deliciousness that the presence of Jesus Christ, may, diffuse in you, remain
with silence at his feet, begging him to receive himself, and to thank himself
in you; and be contented to remain with a profound respect in his presence.
(5.) Make your petitions to him, with fervency, and with a firm confidence of
being heard in them: beg of him the grace, never to loose his favor by a
mortal sin, and to die in an act of his love: Beseech him earnestly, to
inspire you with a contempt of the world, with a disengagement from all earthly
objects; patience in the government of your family; charity in conversation, so
as never to be backbiting your neighbors; liberality toward the poor:
fidelity to his graces: and with the spirit of devotion in your prayers: (6.)
and lastly, after having returned thanks most affectionately, to the goodness
of Jesus Christ, in vouchsafing to come into your heart, offer to him in
gratitude, the victory you may have gotten over the sallys of your humor, or
any other imperfection that displeases him in you, and which is most customary:
and take care till the next communion, to be faithful in this point, to
correct this imperfection, and five times a day, quell this passion, in honor
of the five wounds of our Savior: (7.) Put your self from time to time, during
the day, in mind of what passed in communion, remember the favor you have
received of your Jesus, to give him thanks for it: And keep a guard over your
heart and tongue, that you may not profane either by any word, or inordinate
desires of your own, a soul that is sanctified by the presence of a God.

13. In fine, remember to make reflections from time to time, in the day time,
upon the great truths of Christianity, to convince your mind of them, and
engrave them deep in your heart. Think often, (1.) that you have but one soul
to loose, or save: and but once to die, well, or ill: (2.) that one cannot go
to heaven without merit, and that one cannot merit, but by using violence over
ones passions: (3.) that God whom we serve so carelessly, is the disposer of our
misery, or happiness: and that he has heaven and hell at his disposal: Alas! if
we search with so much earnestness, the favor of those upon whom depends a
good success of our affairs, why do we neglect his freindship, upon whom
depends a happy or miserable Eternity? (4.) What a blindness is it, to regret
the loss of what we have here in this world, and not be concerned at the loss
of a God, which by a mortal sin we sustain! (5.) It is impossible to love and
serve God, and the world, at the same time, and to save ones self the broad and
easy way: we must necessarily renounce, either the heavenly, or earthly
paradise, (6.) what will it profit you to have gained all the riches of the
world, if you loose your own soul?

A SAINT FOR THE YEAR. SAINT ROSE.
THE VERTVE.
The renouncing of the pleasures of sense, curiosity, vanity, and rallerie.

THE PRACTICE.
First, to say nothing in passion.

Secondly, not to be so easy as to comply with any that shall backbite others.

Thirdly, to seek nothing out of pure curiosity, or self-satisfaction.

I. Before Communion.
1 J go to receive a God who is my judge: O grant my Jesus, that I may not
receive thee to my damnation.

2. I am about to receive in my heart, a God who is my Savior, o God, receive
thou thy self there, with the love thou deservest.

3. O my judge, I tremble, I am ready to die with confusion and grief, whilst I
approach your majesty. O my Savior, I hope in your goodness, I abandon my self
entirely to you; I burn with desire to open my heart to you, I will die with
love of you, and breath my last in you.

I unite my self to all the respect which Angels, to all the love which
Seraphins bear you, to all the confidence of the sick that you have cured, o my
Jesus, during your whole life; and I hope with them, that you will give a
speedy remedy to all the diseases of my soul.

II. During Communion.
1. O my Jesus! o my love! o God of glory! o God of goodness! o majesty of my
God! who are you, and who am I?

2. Receive your self in me, thank your self in me; Sacrifice your self upon my
heart for me; I unite my self to all that you are going to do in me.

3. In your passage thorough my heart, heal all its curiosities; and all the
ill words of my tongue.

III. After Communion.
1. O liberality of my Jesus, how am I obliged to you, for having given me a
God for the nourishment of my soul! O that all creatures, and all the Angels
would oyn with me, in giving you due thanks for me!

2. I adore you my Jesus, as my Creator who gave me my life; as my Savior,
who has delivered me from death; as a God of glory, who has designed me for
Paradise.

3. Pause here, and in silence, look upon ^es^s Christ as your Savior, with
confidence: as your Judge and with fear, as your most loving and lovely God,
with love.

4. Beg of him to apply himself to your senses, to your mind, to your heart to
cure your infirmities, to purify them, and fill them with his love.

A GENERAL PRACTICE FOR THE VIRTUE OF THE MONTH.
Together with the manner whereby you ought to honor a Saint every month.

1. One ought to form a high Idea of this virtue, and conceive a fervent desire
to practice it; and for this reason, it were good to make a meditation of it,
in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end of the month.

2. One ought to receive it from ones Directour, as from God himself, who
inspires him therewith, and who will exact an account of it ar the day of
Judgment: it is good to beg it often of God, by the intercession of the holy
Patron recommended to your choice and particularly, in the morning, at noon and
at night, saying for this end, a Pater and Ave.

3. The practice of the virtue of the month, ought to be in this manner: (1.)
you must offer the first communion of the month, to obtain it. (2) in the
morning when you rise, make a firm resolution to practice it that day;
forecasting to your self, the occasions you may have to exercise it.

4. Before dinner, recollect your self the space of a Pater and Ave, to
consider how you have practiced it, and to see whether that morning you have
exercised any acts of it, or fallen into the contrary vice; and if you find you
have, ask pardon of God, and purpose to be more faithful the following part of
the day.

5. In your examen at night, make the same review, and compare with diligence,
the faults you have committed after dinner, with those committed in the
morning, noting the number upon a paper, or with knots upon a piece of thread,
to see if your fidelity was greater after dinner, then in the morning.

6. Take care every dal, especially in the morning to make there acts of the
month, and the same after dinner, and for exterior acts, take care to keep a
watch over your self that you fall not upon occasion into the vice contrary to
it.

7. If you happen to fail, impose upon your self immediately, some
mortification, (if occasion permits) that may be contrary to the fault you
committed: for example, if you have for your virtue, to say nothing out of
humor or inclination, or the mortification of your tongue; after you have
failed, hinder your self from speaking when you have never so much mind to it,
if it be nothing but unprofitable discourse; or keep a greater silence then
ordinary, by retiring your self; and the like you may do, in respect of other
virtues.

8. Give an exact account to your Directour, of your care or negligence in the
practice of the virtue of the month, and be afraid that God should withdraw his
particular grace, of which you have great need, if you neglect this particular
care, because God will treat you as you do him.

9. Persuade your self, that all your spiritual advancement depends upon your
practice of this virtue, which if you neglect, you will never profit in it.
Remember also to offer some of your alms and mortifications to our Lord, to
obtain this virtue, and present them to him by the hands of your Directour.

10. Honor your monthly Patron, invoking him three times a day, saying for
this end, a Pater and Ave: (2.) Have recourse to him in your occurring
difficulties: (3.) Give thanks to our Lord, for the graces bestowed upon him.
(4.) Communicate upon his feast: (5.) Make a Letanie of all the Saints you have
every month, and say them every day.

AN EXERCISE VERY PROFITABLE TO prepare ones self to die well. A prayer to
Jesus Christ.
Savior of the world, word incarnate, life of the dying, and death of the
living; life of the dying, by the glory you bestow upon them, purchased by your
precious blood; death of the living, by the grace which you give them to dye to
the flesh, to live to the spirit; animate this exercise with your holy dove, to
the end that by the ^ractice of it we may find our selves so prepared for
death, that after this life, we man live with you eternally in heaven, there to
bless, praise and love you, with the Father and holy Ghost. Amen.

Ever praised be the most holy Sacrament of the Altar. ADVICE FOR THE PRACTICE
of this Exercise.
SInce it is a truth of which we have daily but too great an experience, (and
which yet for all that, we too easily forget) that we must dye, that a sudden
death may perhaps surprise us unawares; as we see happens often to those that
think least of it; or that the extreme pains of our sickness, may deprive us of
the liberty to make those acts that are necessary for this last hour, the hour
of all hours most important; the hour, after which, there remains no more
hours; the hour that decides our Eternal happiness, or misery; it is necessary
every month, to prepare our selves by the exercises of a death in imagination,
to those which we must really practice, when we come actually to dye. Watch and
prepare your selves, because the son of man will come at the hour you think
least of, Says our Savior, in the 13. of S. Mark's Gospel; and in the 12. of
Ecclesiastes, we are warned, that where the tree falls there it lies.

As near as you can, either the day before, or upon the day you exercise this
devotion, make your Sacramental confession, which will not hinder you from
making your spiritual confession to Jesus Christ, either before, or after the
sacramental one, according to each ones devotion.

After confession, make a sacramental communion, by way of Viaticum, as if it
were your last; and in case you actually communicate, endeavor to have by you,
some meddal, (to which the Pope has applied a plenary Indulgence) to gain one.

Upon the day of your devotion, if possible, hear mass, to unite your self more
particularly in this holy sacrifice (which is a real representation of that
upon the cross) to Jesus Christ dying, offering him to the eternal father,
together with all the sacrifices which shall be offered to the end of the
world, to obtain the grace of a happy death.

It will be very profitable to make choice of the last day of every month, for
this exercise; and if one be not minded to make it altogether, one may begin
the first point in the morning, and the second, at some other hour that day; or
otherwise, perform it in two days; and then, one should repeat over again, the
acts of contrition, of faith, of hope, and of charity, contained in the first
point, observing to make your meditation that day, upon the subject of death,
and exercise ones self more particularly, in good works, in the practice of
mortification, and other virtues.

You must also take notice, that tho there be many acts noted in this exercise,
it is only to facilitate the practice of them to those who for want of being
habituated in them' would otherwise find great difficulty to perform them; for
the best, are those that love produces in our heart,

We have added at the end of this discourse, the recommendation of the soul, in
English, for those who having the devotion (thereby in a holy manner to
anticipate their death) to join these to the foresaid devotions, do not
understand them in Latin; and in this case, one ought to change the terms that
concern another to ones self; as, in stead of saying, pray for him or her, or
receive this soul; say pray, for me, receive my soul, and so in other places;
reserving the conclusion of this exercise till after your last prayer.

Now the fruit which one ought to draw from hence, (as shall be noted in the
following meditation), is the contempt of the world, a weaning ones self from
creatures, the renouncing of ones self and the amendment of ones faults; which
are the true means to obtain the grace, to die a death that hshall be the
beginning of a most happy and blessed l^fe.

If we make this exerc^se with care, during our lives, it is not to be conceived,
how profitable we shall find it at our death, where we may repeat the same, or
cause it to be read to us. You may make the meditation in the morning, after
your prayer, and before you go out. The first part part of the exercise for
death, may be made in the Curch, before Communion, or during mass; and the
other part, in the evening, toward four or five a clock.

A MEDITATION DISPOSITIONS FOR A happy death.
Put your self in to the presence of God, and beg of him his divine inspiration.

FOr the ground of this meditation, one must be well possessed of this truth,
That life is only a gage given us by God, in trust; wherefore i^ follows if we
be not always prepared, and disposed to give it back, we refuse him the right
of sovereignty, which he has upon our beings.

It is appointed for all men once to die, and after that, to be judged; Says
the great Apostle to the Heb: Chap. 9. COnsidering this truth, That one dies
bur once, and that an ill death can never be repaired throughout the whole, and
vast extent of Eternity; we may easily perceive, how necessary it is, not to be
surprised, but to be always upon our guard, as that servant, of whom the
Gospel speaks, which waits for the coming of his master, in the 12. Chap: of
S. Luke.

I. POINT.
Since we must necessarily dye, it behooves us much to conceive well this
truth, That death is certain, and the hour of death uncertain; and that all the
prudence of a Christian, consists in preparing ones self well for it, that we
may not fail in an affair, which in truth, is the affair of affairs, and the
sole and only one, we have to do in this world, since we come into it, only
to save our souls, and in loosing them we lose all: For what shall it profit a
man, to gain the whole world, if he loose his own soul? Says our Sovereign
master Jesus Christ, i^ the 8. Chap: of S: Mark.

O my God, how great is the blindness of the most part of mankind, who not
thinking on this great truth, live only an earthly sensual, and brutish life,
and never elevating their minds to heavenly things, fix their affections so
fast to this mortal life, that they prefer it before the eternal. He that
loves his life, Says our savior, shall loose it; (...) he that hates it in
this world, shall gain for it, life everlasting in the next: in the 12 Chap: of
S. John.

O my God, ^is no^ therefore to love our lives ^ to have to ^ great a fondness
for them si^ce this fondness for a em^orall life proceeding from an irregu^ar
love of our selves ^ puts us in danger of loosing an everlasting one and that
you assure me, o my divine Jesus, that if any one comes to you, and does not
hate this sensual life, and even his own soul, he cannot be your disciple.
Give me, o Lord, a holy hatred of this mortal life, which may make me
continually tend, and pretend to the eternal one, where I may love you for
ever.

II POINT.
The death of Saints is precious in Gods sight, says the Psalmist, in the 118.
Psalm. If we will dye the death of Saints, we must live their lives: (1.) by
keeping our affections always as much weaned from the things of this world, as
if we were to dye every moment; because there is no moment, in which death may
not surprise us, and in which, we ought not to be prepared to receive it, if we
will not hazard our salvation: (2.) by overcoming the natural fear which we
have of death, by faith, and by the confidence which we ought to have that
Jesus Christ, in whose hands are the keys of life and death, and who loves us
infinitely more then we love our selves, will send it us at such a time, and in
such a manner, as in the order of his divine providence, he foresees best for
us. Has he not created us for life everlasting? do not we believe that life
better then this mortal life we lead? if we are not of this belief, we want
faith; and by consequence, have no hope; because we cannot obtain that
happiness he has promised in the other life, but by death. But what charity
also can an interessed soul have, which loves its own life more then the will
of God? and has a greater fear to dye, then to see, and unite it self to him?
Perfect charity, says the holy Scripture, in S. John^ Gospel, chap: 24.
excludes fear: And as we ought to show our love which we have for God, by our
hatred to sin, what hatred do we express to it, when, for all we know, we
cannot live without committing every day some, yet we are so much afraid of
death? O, if we had a true love, with what joy should we embrace death, that we
might be in a state in which we could no more offend his infinite goodness!
Since the least sin (as the Doctors of the Church affirm) is so more to be
feared then death.

III. POINT.
Should God give us the choice of of the time, the hour, and the manner of our
death, could we make a better choice then he? who ordains it by his infinite
wisdom, power, and goodness, and who, having created us for himself, and
redeemed us with his blood, accordingly, desires nothing more, then to save,
and to bring us to the enjoyment of that happy end? And since faith teaches us
this verity, why do not we entirely abandon the care of our lives and deaths
to him? what can there be better for us in heaven; or earth; in life, or death;
then to accomplish his most just, and most holy will? And because we ought
necessarily to submit to its orders, is it not better to do it freely, by an
humble submission to, and filial confidence in his divine goodness, then to do
it by constraint, as the Devils do; and by that resistance, render this
action, rather worthy of punishment, then recompense? If the fear of our sins
makes us apprehend death, and desire only to live, to do penance for them,
what better penance can we perform, that is more agreeable to God then
perfectly to conform our selves to his will, and undergo the sentence of death,
to render him the obedience a creature owes to his creator; and thereby to
show him, that we prefer the honor of pleasing him, before our own lives? If
actions so much the harder they be to perform, so much the more meritorious
they be esteemed, what can there be harder then to renonce life; and what
greater penance can we perform, then frankly and freely, to give up our lives
to God? because, by giving them to him, we give not only all we can give, but
all that is dearest to us, No one has greater charity, then he who gives up his
life; says our Savior, in the 13 of S. John's Gospel: And if a God would dye
so painful and ignominious a death for us, and give his life upon the cross,
for our salvation, can we refuse him ours? Is our life more precious or
necessary then his O my soul, had we never so llittle love for God, or
gratitude for this great favor of his, we ought to desire a thousand lives, to
lay them all down for his sake. What have we that is not his? O my God, since I
am nothing, but by you, I will be nothing, but what you would have me, I care
not whether I live or dye.

Affections and Resolutions.
SInce that upon the moment of my death, depends my eternal life; Grant, o my
God, that by a true hatred of sin, by a perfect contempt of the world, and of
its vain honors pleasures, and riches, and by an entire renouncing of my self,
I may always keep my felf prepared for this last hour; and that I may never let
my self forget death: least permitting the lamp of charity to be extinguished,
and the oil of good works to be wanting in my soul, you may surprise me in this
condition, and reproach me with the same terrible words, you did the foolish
virgins, in the 25. Chap: of S. John's Gospel; I know you not: but that keeping
my self always ready for your coming, I may merit to enter with you, into that
eternal nuptial feast, Where neither eye has seen, ear heard, nor has it
enterd into the heart of man to conceive, what you have prepared for those that
love you. Give me, o my God, the light of your holy Spirit, to the end I may
not suffer my self to be deceived, nor seduced by my senses; to take what is
false for true; and that I may not esteem the things of this mortal life, good
or bad, but as they lead me to, or withdraw me from my last end.

CONCLUSION.
LEt us conclude this meditation with this truth, that if we will dye the death
of the just, we must live the lives of the just; since the way to obtain a good
death, is to live a good life; and as there is nothing more precious, nor more
to be desired then a good death, so there is nothing more unhappy, nor that we
ought more to fear, then an ill death; and the best means of securing our
selves, in an affair of so great an importance as this, is daily to live, as if
it were to be the last day of our lives; keeping our affections as perfectly
weaned from the things of the world, as if we were ready to leave it, where,
all things that be not of God, will appear as smoke, that either is scattered
it self, or at best covers but a fleeting shadow.

A MOST PROFITABLE EXERCISE TO PREPARE our selves for death. UPON THIS MOMENT
depends Eternity.
The day you intend to make this exercise enter into the thoughts of death, and
look upon that day as the last of your life.

THE FIRST PART.
IMagine your self lying sick upon your deathbed, and that your good Angel is
sent by God to give you notice of the irrevocable decree of your death; and
that he says to you as Esaye did, to Ezechias, Isa: 38. Dispose of your
affairs: because you shall dye and shall no longer live.

Prostrating your self as at the foot of your Crucifix, or before the blessed
Sacrament, beg with all your heart, the grace, and light of the holy Ghost; the
help, and succor of the blessed Virgin, and of the Saints your Patrons, and of
your good Angel, to maKe the following acts.

AN ACT OF RESIGNATION.
MY heart is prepared, my God, my heart is prepared, that your will, and not
mine, be done in me, and by me, now, and for all eternity.

1. O God eternal; immense, and infinite, who are sufficient in your self, and
stand in need of none of your creatures; how little does it import; whether I
live or die, so I may accomplish your holy will, in which alone, true life
consists! therefore, let it not be as I will, but as you please.

An acknowledgement of our nothingness.
2. To acknowledge the dependence that I have of you, my sovereign Creator,
and openly to confess before heaven and earth, that you alone, are he that is;
and that I, misetable creature, am he that is not; I embrace with an humble
submission, the destruction of this corruptible being, and consent that by
death, it should return to its first nothing, out of which you took it.

A restitution of our being into the hands of God.
3. O my Sovereign Creator, will restore you the being you have given me, and
for this end, I accept of death, in the manner that shall be most pleasing to
you, and be most to your glory: Dispose therefore of your creature, and destroy
this body of sin, in punishment of the offenses, it has committed against your
divine majesty: That this body may return to the earth from whence it came, but
that my soul created after thy image, may return to your bosom.

An acknowledgement of Gods soveraig^ dominion over us.
4. O my God, tho my death be of it self, a thing of necessity, yet I am
resolved for love of you, as far as possible, to make it a will-offering: I
rejoice that by it, I shall be out of a state and condition, any more to resist
your Sovereign dominion over me, as Liege Lord of all creatures; and I accept
it as a just punishment of the ill use I have made of my free will, which you
have given me.

How to receive death as a just punishment of sin.
5. Since death, O my God, is the punishment you have ordained for sin, it is
with an humble and submissive heart to the decree of your justice, that I
accept it in the spirit of penance, with all the pains, humiliations, and
privations, which follow it, and in satisfaction of all the sins I have
committed.

An offering of our Life to God.
6. Receive, o my Savior, the sacrifice that I make to your divine Majesty, of
my bo die and my life, which I offer as a victime sacrificed to your self. Unite
it to that you offered for me upon the cross, and consume it with the fire of
your divine love.

A desire to render to Jesus Christ, Death for Death.
7. O my divine Jesus, since that your love to me made you dye upon the cross
for my salvation, is it not just, that with a good will I accept death, for
love of you, in counter-change, as far as I am able, of that you endured for
me. O why have I not a thousand lives, to give them all for this end, to
acknowledge thereby that you are my God!

Spiritual confession
With profound humility at the feet of Jesus Christ, as if he were present in
his sacred humanity, accuse your self to him, of all your sins, taking a short
review of them; at the end of which, excite your soul to a lively and tender
sorrow for them.

AN ACT OF CONTRITION.
O my God prostrate before your sovereign majesty, I most humbly beg pardon for
the great contempt, and abuse I have made, of your holy graces, and of all the
sins I have committed from my birth, in thought, word, or deed: I retract and
disavow them, with my whole heart; Yes, o my God, it is from my whole heart that
I detest, and disavow them, and wish, I had never committed them, not for fear
of the punishment they deserve, but only because I have by them, offended your
infinite goodness, which deserves to be loved above all things, and honored by
all creatures. O why is not my heart capable too, of an infinite sorrow, to blot
out their guilt! But accept, o my God, in satisfaction of that sorrow which is
wanting in me that which my Savior had in the garden of Olives, and upon the
cross, for the sins of the whole world in general, and for mine in particular.
Accept also for this effect, that sorrow and contrition, which all the Saints
have ever had. Purifiy me from my secret sins, and pardon those I have
committed by others, and despise not, o my God, an humble, and contrite heart,
which hopes only for pardon of its sins from your infinite mercy. In the 50.
Psalm, you have promised, that when a sinner laments his sins, you will no
longer remember his iniquities.

And if you please, o my God, to prolong my life, I make a firm purpose, by the
assistance of your holy grace, to amend particularly such and such faults, and
thereby, endeavor to repair what is past.

Having made these Acts, receive as an absolution, that which Jesus Christ, the
sovereign priest gives you spiritually, applying to your self, his divine
merits; after which, imagine you hear him say to you, as he did to S. Mary
Magdelen; Your sins are forgiven you; go in peace.

Say the 50. Psalm. Miserere mei etc: in the spirit of penance.

Aspirations to the three divine persons.
O father Eternal, since you so loved the world, as to give your only son for
its redemption, I dare presume to hope from your mercy, the salvation of my
soul; since you gave him, not to condemn us, but to save us, and for that end
imposed upon him, the holy name of Jesus, Luke 1.

O divine Jesus, be you my Jesus, and remembcr your own words, that you came
not for the just, but for sinners; Luke 5. O my God, you will not the death of
a sinner, but that he be converted and live; EZech. 18. Convert me therefore,
to your self, that I may live an Eternal life.

Come divine spirit, repose in my soul with your 7. gifts, for to purify,
justify, and sanctify it; consume in it, by the fire of your holy love, all
that is yet earthly therein; and fortify it in this its last passage, against
all the temptations of its enemies.

An act of Faith.
I protest my God before heaven and earth that I will dye in the faith and
union of the holy Catholic church: I believe firmly all that it believes, and
teaches, because you my God, who are the Eternal truth, have said, and
revealed it; and that you are an infinite goodness and holiness that cannot
deceive any one, an infinite wisdom, that cannot err, and are moreover
omnipotent: And from this very moment, I disavow, and detest all temptations
contrary to it which the Enemy may suggest in the last moments of my life: I
return you thanks with my whole heart for the great grace which you have done
me, in making me of the numbe of the children of your holy Church.

Recite the Apostles Creed Credo in Deum, etc: And making reflection upon every
Article, protest, that you believe it.

An act of Hope.
O my God, tho for the enormity and inconceivable multitude of my offenses, I
most justly merit hell yet confiding entirely in the merits of my Savior Jesus
Christ, and in the infinite greatness of your mercy, which can pardon more sins
then I can committ, I cease not to hope for pardon, and for the grace to
persevere in your love, to which, I consecrate the last moment of my life.

An act of Charity.
O my God, when shall this soul of mine being separated from my body, and from
all creatures, be united perfectly to your self, and love you with that pure,
and unchangeable affection, with which the blessed in heaven love you?

O, what is there I desire in haven, or what is it I desire on earth, butt you,
the God of my heart, my God, and everlasting portion of my felicity?

I have regarded all things as nothing, vile, and contemptible, to gain Jesus
Christ.

An act of Love toward our Neighbor.
O my God, I beg of you, grace and mercy for all the creatures you have
redeemed with your precious blood, particularly for the true children of your
holy Church, and for those from whom I have received any displeasure, whom I
pardon, my God, for love of you, as I desire you should pardon me,

A desire to receive Jesus Christ.
O my God, my Creator, and redeemer, my beginning, and my end, the only
sovereign object of my heart, O, what a longing desire have I to receive you,
for to unite my self to you! come then into my soul, sanctify it, and replenish
my heart with your graces, take possession of all its affections, to the end,
that all the moments of my life that are yet behind, may entirely be consecrad
to your love.

The Spiritual communion for the Viatick, or the Sacramental one, if
permitted to receive it
Hearken to your good Angel, who invites you to eat the bread of life, and
speaks to you, as that of Elias did to him; Arise, and eat, because you have a
great journey still to make. 3. Kings. c. 19.

Imagine, that Jesus Christ, accompanied with the blessed Virgin, your good
Angel, and the Saints your Patrons, entering your chamber, to give you with his
own hands, his sacred body, has he did to his Apostles in his last supper; and
that he says to you, as he did to them, Take, eat, this is my body, which was
delivered to death, to give you life.

Having adored him with all your heart, Salute him with the following words:

O my God, since you have said, that he who eats you, shall live eternally, and
shall not dye; Grant me the grace, that by the reception of your sacred body, I
may live only in you, by you, and for you; and that quitting this mortal
life, I may, by the force and virtue of this divine bread, arrive to heaven,
where I may for ever, see, and enjoy your divine majesty.

Alas! from whence comes this happiness to me, that my God should come to visit
me?

Lord, I am not worthy that you should enter into my soul speak only but a
word, and it shall be healed.

Having received him, entertain your self amorously with him, make all your
senses appear before him, and all your faculties, to make him, as it were, an
oath of allegiance: renew the vows and promises you have made, conjure him
never more to leave you, and say to him, as the disciples going to Emmaus did,
Stay with me, o Lord, for it is late, the evening of my life approaches. Or
with Simeon, Let now, o Lord, thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have
seen the author of my salvation; Or with David, Although I walk in the middle of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, because you are with me.

O my God, put your self as a seal upon my heart, to the end, that all earthly
things may find no more entrance thereinto.

Unite this Communion, to that which this divine Savior made before his death,
and to all those which the most holy Virgin, and the Saints made during their
lives; and also to all those which shall be made, to the end of the world, to
supply the imperfections you have committed, in receiving this divine Sacrament.

Return God thanks, for the favor of receiving it, and for all those other
graces which he has so liberally bestowed upon you, and invite all creatures to
bless, praise, and thank him for you? Reciting the. 117. Psalm;

Laudate Dominum omnes gentes, etc. or the Canticle, Benedicite omnia opera,
etc.

THE 2. PART.
Spiritual extreamunction.
I Imagine, that Jesus Christ having assisted at your communion, as has been
said, enters also into your chamber bringing the holy oils composed of his
precious blood, to apply the holy unctions with his own sacred hand.

Make acts of contrition in receiving them, to blot out all the sins committed
by each sense.

IN THE APPLICATION to the Eyes.
O my Jesus, and my God, I demand most humbly pardon for all the sins I have
committed by so many irregular looks or casts of my eyes, and so many
unprofitable tears; and to blot out these sins, apply to me, those your amorous
looKs upon the cross, upon your Crucifiers, and the tears you shed for my
salvation.

TO THE EARS.
Pardon me also the sins I have committed in taking pleasure to hearken to so
many ill discourses; and to make satisfaction for them, apply to my foul, the
merit of that patience, and humility with which you heard so many blasphemies,
injuries, and calumnies uttered against you.

TO THE NOSTRILLS.
I beg pardon also, o my God, for having too much sought perfumes and good
smells, for having taken too much pleasure in them, and having been too
delicate, and nice in avoiding ill ones; for the satisfaction of these faults,
apply to me, the merit of those ill sents you suffered in the stable, and upon
mount Calvary.

TO THE MOUTH
O my Savior Jesus Christ, pardon me the infinite number of sins that I have
committed in words, and all my irregularities in eating and drinking, and blot
them out by applying to my soul, the merits of your divine prayers, and
preachings, and your holy fasts.

TO THE HANDS.
Pardon me, my divine Jesus, all the many unprofitable, and evil actions that
I have committed, and for having so delicately treated my body; and for this
end, apply to me, the merit of those holy actions, and divine miracles wrought
by your sacred hands, which were nailed upon the hard wood of the Cross for my
sake, and by my sins.

TO THE FEET.
O my God, with my whole heart I beg pardon for all the steps that I have made
unprofitably, or for any ill end: Apply to me for the satisfaction of these
faults, the merit of those sacred steps you made barefoot, with so much toil,
for the salvation of mankind, especially in carrying your cross.

After Extrem unction, make the sollowing Acts, with a penitent mind.
O my God, to satisfy as much as I am able, your divine Justice, and to make
you a due satisfaction for my sins, I accept death with my whole heart, and I
rejoice at the separation of my soul from my body, in punishment of the sins I
have committed, by following rather my irregular inclinations, then your holy
will;

2. And that my body in punishment of its pride, and ambition, shall be buried
under the earth, and trodden under foot,

3. And for that inordinate love I have born it, and the too great care I have
taken for its ease and pleasure, I rejoice that that it returns to corruption,
and becomes the food of worms.

4. And for the affection I have had for riches, and for creatures, and the
abuse I have made of them, I am glad to be separated from, and deprived of them.

5. And for the forgetfullness I have had of you, my God, during my life, I
accept the forgetfulness that all will have of me after my death:

6. And for having made use of all my senses, to offend you, I accept, and
offer in satisfaction, the privation and loss of them all:

7. And in punishment of my having vainly searched to please creatures, I am
glad that by death, I shall become an object of their hatred, horror, and
contempt.

For the Approaehes of Death. Hearken to your good Angel speaking to you, as
to the Virgins in the Gospel;
BEhold, your Spouse is coming, Go forth, and meet him:

And preparing your self for his coming, with the burning lamp of charity in
your hands, say with David; I rejoice at the good news they tell me, let us
enter into the house of our Lord.

O Lord God of strength, how amiable are thy tabernacles! my soul faints with
desire of them.

My soul thirsts after God the source of life; when shall I come, and appear
before his presence?

As the thirsty Heart desires the fountain, so my soul desires thee, o my God.

O, how do I desire to be delivered out of this mortal body, and to be with
Christ.

Union with CHRIST JESUS dying.
O my divine Jesus, granr me your grace, that my sorrows may be united to
yours; my agony, and my death sanctified by yours; and that I may partake of
those sacred disposit^ons, which your holy soul had at the last moment of your
life, to which, I unite my self with all my heart, to supply those which I
want. I abandon my self entirely to you, to suffer for your love, the pains of
death, as long, and many, as you please; and I renounce, and disavow all the
impatience, and evil thar their force may cause me unwillingly to committ.

Have recourse to the blessed Virgin. and the Saints.
O holy Virgin, mother of my God, refuge of Sinners; be now my Advocate, and
grant I may feel the effects of your power with the blessed Trinity.

O Mary, mother of grace, mother of mercy, receive me at the hou^ of my death,
and defend me from my Enemies.

Show that you are my mother, and obtain, that he who for our salvation was
willing to become your son, and be born of you, may receive me by your
intercession.

O all ye Saints, and blessed spirits, interceed now for my soul, in this
extremity, that I may obtain the victory over my enemies.

Great S. Joseph, and you all my holy patrons, and Protectours, assist me.

Great S. Michael, fight for me:

Charitable Angel, my dear Guardian, defend me from the ambushes of my
Enemies, and forsake me not in this last passage.

Eternal father, look upon me in your dear son Jesus Christ, who has shed his
blood for my salvation.

Have pity upon me, according to the greatness of your mercies, and pardon my
sins, for the glory of your holy name.

Enter not into judgment with me, o my God, for in thy sight, no one living
can justify himself.

My divine Jesus, put your cross, and your passion, between your judgment, and
my soul.

My God, my destiny is in your hands, save me, I beseech you.

O Lord, in you have I trusted, therefore I shall not be eternally confounded.

An act of adoration, to the most holy Trinity.
O most holy, and most adorable Trinity, I adore you with my whole heart, and I
unite my self, both for the present, and for eternity, to all the adorations,
and praises, which the most holy humanity of my Savior Jesus Christ, and his
most holy mother, together with all the Saints and Angels, do, or have renderd
you, or shall eternally render you in heaven. I offer you all the sacrifices of
this most holy humanity, which are now offered, or shall be daily offered, to the
day of judgment, all the world over, in satisfaction of all my sins, and in
thanksgiving for all your divine benefits bestowed upon me.

If the Recommendation of the soul be said, observe to say at the end, this
conclusion; afterward, say the Responsory; Subvenite Sancti, etc.

Conclusion of this Exercise. Act of abandonment and resignation.
O my God I abandon my self, and without reserve, to that divine judgment you
shall pronounce upon my soul; I submit my self to it, with all my heart; I
adore, and reverence it as most just, and equitable, now, and for Eternity.

A Spiritual Expiring.
Holding your cross in your hand, Say these words; Behold, o my God, my
Creator, and my Redeemer, that I come unto you because you call me; receive me
in the bosom of your mercy.

And amorously kissing the wounds of your Crucifix, pronounce the holy namas of
Jesus, and Mary, at each wound; then repeating the last words of our Savior;
My God, into your hands, I yield up my Spirit; expire in the sacred wound of
the side of Jesus, chose it for your grave, and hide your self in his sacred
heart.

After this Exercise, we must look upon our selves as dead to the world, and to
our selves; accordingly, we should often repeat those words of S. Paul; I live,
yet not I, but Jesus Christ that lives in me, and my life is hid with Jesus
Christ in God.

THE RECOMMENDATION of the soul, (which ought to begin with these little
Letanies) and the following prayers, are to be said in time of agony; these may
serve for those that are about the dying person.
LOrd have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Holy Mary prayer for him.
Holy Angels pray for him.
Holy Abel, pray for him.
Quire of all the just, pray for him.
S. Abraham, pray for him.
S: John Baptist, pray for him.
Holy Patriarchs and Prophets, pray for him.
S. Peter, pray for him.
S. Paul, pray for him.
S. Andrew, pray for him.
S. Johne, pray for him.
Holy Apostles, and Evangelists pray for him.
Holy Disciples of our Lord, pray for him.
Holy Innocents, pray for him.
S. Stephen, pray for him.
S. Laurence, pray for him.
Holy Martyrs, pray for him.
S. Silvester, pray for him.
S. Gregory, pray for him.
S. Austin, pray for him.
Holy Bishops, and Confessors, pray for him,
S. Bennet pray for him.
S. Francis, pray for him.
Holy Monks, and Hermits, pray for him.
S. Mary Magdalen, pray for him.
S. Lucy, pray for him.
Holy Virgins, and Widows, pray for him.
Saints of God of both sexes, interceed for him.
Lord, be merciful unto him, and pardon all his sins.
Lord be merciful to him, and deliver him.
O Lord, deliver him from your wrath.
Deliver him from the danger of death.
Deliver him from an evil death.
Deliver him from the pains of hell.
Deliver him from all evil.
Deliver him from the power of the devil.
Deliver him by your holy Nativity.
Deliver him by your holy cross and passion.
Deliver him by your holy death and burial.
Deliver him by your glorious resurrection.
Deliver him by your admirable ascension.
Deliver him by the grace of the holy Ghost the Comforter.
Deliver him in the day of judgment.
Lord, we beseech thee to hear us, poor Sinners.
We beseech thee to hear us so, as to pardon him.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
THE PRAYER. Proficiscere anima christiana.
CHristian soul, leave this world, in the name of the omnipotent Father, who
created thee; in the name of his son Jesus Christ, who redeemed thee; in the
name of the holy Ghost, who diffused himself in thee; in the name of the holy
Angels, and Archangells, Thrones, Dominations, Cherubins and Seraphins; in the
name of the Patriarchs, and Prophets, in the name of the Apostles and
evangelists; of the holy Martyrs and Confessors; in the name of the holy
Religious and Anchorites; of the holy Virgins, and of all the Saints of God;
that this day, your habitation may be in peace, and your abode in the holy
Sion: by the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

THE PRAYER Deus clemens.
O God of goodness and clemency, who according to the infinite-greatness of
your mercies, blot out the sins of the penitent, and pardon their crimes and
sins past cast a propitious look upon your servant. (N) hear his prayers for
the remission of all his sins, which he confesses with all his heart, as much
as he is able. Renew in him, o best of Fathers, whatever may in time be either
corrupted by the frailty of nature, or depraved by the malice of the Devil; and
unite to the body of your triumphant Church, this living member of Jesus
Christ: Have pity, o Lord, of his tears, and receive him to the grace of your
reconciliation, who has no confidence but in your sole mercy, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Commendo te.
MY dearest Brother, I recommend thee to the omnipotency of God, and I remitt
you into the arms of him who is your Creator, that after you have paid the
debt due to humane nature, and by death are separated from your body, you may
return to your Author, which formed you out of the slime of the earth; Let the
resplendant Quire of Angels come to receive your soul at its going out of your
body; Let the august company of the Apostles be therewith present; Let the most
goodly and triumphant army of Martyrs, be at the same rendevous; Let the holy
troop of Confessors encompas it; the chaste assembly of Virgins receive it; and
the holy Patriarchs closely embrace it; to make it enjoy in their bosoms, the
repose of the blessed: Let the most sweet Jesus show himself unto you, and
place you amongst those that continually praise him, That you may never know
any of all those horrible things that are in the darkness of hell; the gnashing
of teeth heard in its flames, and the aching and twinging of its torments; Let
Satan with all his dismal guards, fret at your arrival, and seeing you under
the protection of the Angels, fly, and cast themselves head long into the
horrors of eternal darkness; Let God arise, and let his enemies be scatered;
and let those that hate him, fly before his face: Let sinners disapear as the
smoke that vanishes, and perish before God, as wax dissolves before the fire;
Let the just rejoice eternally in the presence of God, and let the Infernal
Legions and ministers of Satan be ashamed and confounded, and never be so bold
as to venture to set upon you, in your passage to Eternity: Let Jesus who was
crucified for you, deliver you from the pains of hell; and and let Jesus who
was willing to dye for you, deliver you from Eternal death; Let Jesus Christ
son of the living God, place you in his paradise, there to enjoy everlasting
pleasures; and let that good shepard own you for one of his flock, and when he
has pardoned you all your sins, place you at his right hand amongst his Elect:
may you see your Redeemer face to face, and assisting continually in his
presence, and your eyes be so happy as to behold clearly the Eternal verity,
and being admitted amongst the blessed, may you enjoy the sweet vision of God
for everlasting ages. Amen.

THE PRAYER. Suscipe Domine.
REceive, o Lord, your servant to the place where he hopes for his salvation,
thtough your mercy. Amen.

Deliver, o Lord, the soul of your servant from all the dangers of hell, and
from all its pains and torments. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your Servant, as you delivered Enoch and Elias from the
common death of mankind. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your Servant, as you delivered Noah from the flood, Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered Abraham from the burning of
the Caldeans, Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered Job from his evils. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered Jsaac from the hand of his
father, that would have sacrificed him. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered Lot out of Sodom, and its
burning. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered Moses from the persecution
of Pharaoh King of Egypt. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered Daniel from the Den, and
the mouths of the Lions. Amen.

Deliver the Soul of your servant, as you delivered the three Children from the
fiery furnace, and from the wrath of a wicked King. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered Susanna from the crime she
was falsely accused of. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered David from the hands of
Saul and Goliath. Amen.

Deliver the soul of your servant, as you delivered S. Peter, and S. Paul from
their chains and prisons. Amen.

Infine, as you delivered the blessed Virgin and Martyr S. Tecla, from three
cruel torments; so vouchsafe to deliver the soul of your servant, and grant it
may rejoice with you in the possession of heavenly felicity. Amen.

THE PRAYER. Commendamus tibi.
O God, we recommend to thee the soul of thy Servant (N) and we beseech you, O
Lord Jesus Christ, Savior of the world, that as out of your mercy, you were
pleased to descend from heaven, for it, you would not refuse to receive it into
the bosom of the Patriarchs.

Take notice, o Lord, of your creature, which was not created by strange Gods
but by you of alone, the onnely living God; for there is no other God but you,
and no works like unto yours.

Lord, recreate this soul with the joy of your presence, and remember not its
past iniquity, nor the excesses which its fury, or the too hot pursuit of its
ill desires, has caused it to commit. There is no doubt but it has sinned, yet
it has never denied the father, Son, and holy Ghost; but has believed in you,
and had the zeal of the glory of your name, and has ever adored him who made
all things. Amen.

THE PRAYER. Delicta Iuventutis.
O Lord, we beseech you not to remenber any more the sins of his youth, nor his
ignorances, but according, to the greatness of your mercy, remember him in the
splendor of your glory. Open the heavens, o Lord, and receive your servant
into your Kingdom: Let S, Michael the Archangel of God, who has merited the
chief command in the Celestial hosts, receive him: Let all the Angels of God
come forth to meet him, and conduct him into the holy City of Jerusalem: Let S.
Peter, to whom were given the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, receive him: Let
S. Paul the Apostle, who was a worthy vessel of Election, assist him: Let S.
John, the beloved of God, to whom were revealed the secrets of heaven,
interceed for him: Let all the Apostles, to whom was given the power of binding
and losing of souls, pray for him: Let all the Saints, and Elect of God, who
for the name of Jesus Ghrist, have suffered torments in this world, interceed
for him; that being separated from, and stripped of his earthly body, he may
merit to arrive to the glory of your heavenly Kindom, by the merits of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who with the Father, and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns world
without end. Amen.

After the soul has quitted the body, recite the following Responsory.

Come speedily, o ye Saints of God, you Angels of our Lord, have ye, and
receive this soul, and offer it in the presence of the most high.

. Let Jesus Christ who has called you, receive you; and let his Angels carry
you into Abraham's bosom.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

. Give him Eternal rest, o Lord, and let him be illuminated with Eternal
light.

. Lord deliver his soul,

. From the gates of hell.

. Let him repose in peace.

. Amen.

. Lord hear my prayer,

. And let my cry come unto thee.

THE PRAYER.
O God, we recommend to you, the soul of your servant, that having passed this
life, he may live only to you; that the sins he has committed in this life,
out of humane frailty, may be pardoned by the infinite bounty, and mercy, and
by the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A COMPENDIUM OF the aforesaid Exercise, to prepare ones self well for death.
Which one may make every night before one goes to bed.
MY heart is prepared, o my God, my heart is prepared; your will be done, my
God and not mine: I abandon my self entirely to receive death, at what time, in
what manner, you please to send it to me.

2 I most humbly beg of you, pardon for all the sins I have committed against
your Sovereign goodness; and I repent me of them, with all my heart.

3. I believe firmly, all that the Roman Catholic Church believes, and
teaches; and I will dye in this belief.

4. I hope to possess eternal life by your mercy, and by the merits of my
Savior Jesus Christ.

5. O my God, I desire to love you above all creatures, and to the contempt of
all creatures, as my Soveraingn good; and my neighbor, as my self, pardoning
him from the bottom of my heart.

6. O my divine Jesus, what an extreme desire have I to receive your sacred
body! and to do it spiritually, unite my self to all the communions that shall
be made throughout the whole Church, to the end of the world, and particularly
at the hour of my death,

7. Afford me the grace, o my divine Savior, to blot out all the sins I have
committed by my senses, by applying to my self, the unction of thy precious
blood.

8. Holy Virgin, mother of my God, defend me from my enemies, and present me to
your son.

9. Great S. Michael, my holy Angel Guardian, my holy Protectours, pray and
assist me, in this last passage.

10. O my God, I renounce all the temptations of the Enemy, and generally, all
that may displease you: I adore and receive your divine judgments upon my
soul, as most just and equitable; and I abandon my self to them, with entire
submission.

11. O Jesus, my divine Jesus, be to me Jesus; O my God, retiring with an
humble confidence, into thy sacred wounds, I commit my soul into thy divine
hands; receive it into the bosom of thy mercy. Amen.

AN EXERCISE OF DEATH, FOR THE last day of the month.
IN THE MORNING.
OFfer all the actions, and sufferings of that day, to our Savior, by the hands
of S. Joseph, which you shall take for your Protector, to obtain a happy
death; and make some of these Acts noted in the beginning of this Exercise? and
then make a resolution so to live that day, as if it were to be the last of
your life.

DVRING THE DAY.
1. Beg every hour of S. Joseph, a good death, and say to your soul; if we were
to dye this moment, are we prepared to appear before God?

2. Before you begin any action, or in conversation, often call to mind this
thought; Would I have done or said this at the hour of my death?

3. Communicate really, or spiritually, in manner of Viatick making the acts,
and affections marked in this Exercise, or contenting your self to remain with
a simple view of faith, in silence and abandonment, in the arms of Jesus, and
to expire in him, by love and confidence.

4, Go from Communion, with a resolution to live no longer to your self, and to
perform no action of your life, purely after a natural, and humane manner;
calli^g often to mind in the day time the advertissement of the Apostle; you
are dead, and your life is hiddem in God With Jesus Christ.

5. Make your meditation upon death, either as it is in your ordinary booK of
meditations, or as it is in this Exercise; and read the thoughts of death, in
the book called Pensees Chretiennes, or Christian thoughts.

IN THE EVERNING.
1. BEfore you go to bed, make a short review in your Examen, of all the sins
of the last month; and take notice chiefly, of those you commit out of custom;
think with sorrow, of your abuse of Gods graces, and favors and of the ill use
you have made of the crosses which God has sent you; Then, putting your self in
the presence of Jesus Christ, your Sovereign Judge, and immaginaing your self
to be before the tribunal of his justice, beg pardon for your sins, with all
the resentment and confusion you are able. Alas! what sorrow would you have for
them, if this night you were to dye and to appear before him?

Then impose upon your self some penance for the following month; and fail
not to rise at the appointed hour, and to give something to thle poor, as often
as you speak in choler, and out of humor.

2. After Examen, make the same Acts that dying persons are wont to make and
which are noted in this Exercise; or content your self to make, (1) An act of
faith, proptesting that you firmly believe, that you shall on day dye: (2.) An
act of confidence, hoping, thot our Savior at your death, will have mercy upon
you, and pardon all your sins: (3.) An act of love, begging him, rather to Send
you death, then permit you to offend him, at least, voluntarily: (4.) An act of
abandonment, putting your life, your soul, and your salvation, into the hands
of God.

In fine, kiss the ground, to render homage to the Sovereignty, and justice of
God, which has ordained that your body should one day be reduced to dust: Look
upon your bed, as your grave, as you are going into it, say three times, JESUS,
MARIA, JOSEPH, Adding.

O my God, grant, that I may repose, and sleep in peace with you. Amen.

Pious thoughts to recollect ones self in God.
1. For riseing.
1. O My God I am intirly yours, be you all in me, be you all things to me, and
let all things else be nothing to me.

2. Lord let me do and suffer all by you, in you, and for you; let me forthwith
dye to my self, and let me live; and allways remain in you.

3. O the God of my heart, and my Portion for eternity, be you the beginning and
end of all my actions, let me plunge and loose my self entirely in you.

2. FOR PRAYER. In the state of Desolation.
1. O Justice of my God, content your self, be you pleased without contenting
me.

2. You are all, my God, and I am nothing before you: I am content that all joy
and consolation be yours, and that nothing, and the privation of all comforts
be mine. O contentment, joy, and happyness of my God, you are dearer to me then
my own satisfaction.

3. My God! how good are you to suffer me to be in the miserable state I am in?
Permit that I sacrifice; the satisfaction of my heart to that of yours; I am
pleased with my condition because it pleases you; and I am here in your
presence for no other end then to please you.

4. O my God, my all; my God, my love, my joy, my hope, let me cease to be to
my self, that you may be all in me.

5. O my God, I see nothing, I feel nothing, I taste nothing of you. But I am
contented to posses you in a manner above the sense of seeing, tasting or
feeling, I would not have you but in your self, without my self.

6. The Angels o Lord honor you in heaven by silence, and mankind on Earth by
annihilation, peace, and entire resignation. Remain in me, and let me remain in
peace, and lost in you.

7. Neither privations, emptiness, distractions, insensibilities, tediousnes,
and oppressions, shall separat me from my God, you come from him, and you unite
me to him.

8. O my soul, thou do much whilst thou think thou do nothing, thou
contentest thy God, thou please him by being so, thou expirest in him, thou
loosest thy self for him, and sacrifisest thy self to him; thou art no longer
in thy self, but do pass into him.

9. O the good will and pleasure of my God, how dear art thou to me. Be content
with me my God, and I am satisfied. You will have me to be so.

10. O Pure faith which transformes my mind into God by blinding it, O pure
love which unites my heart unto the heart of my God, by despoyling it of all
things, remove, consume, and destroy in me all that is humane, sensible, or
natural.

11. Who are you my God, and who am I, that I should dare to speak before, or
behold you, I am but a little dust, and a pure nothing before you; so you look
upon me it is enough, I ought to be content with my nothing, and to be nothing.

12. Lord you can do all things, you know all things, and you love me; you know
my wants and my miseries; it is enough, I desire nothing but you, I abandon my
self to you, do what you will with me, and in me.

Advice in desolation in time of Prayer.
1. SUpport your self by the former feellings, renewing them by a simple
reguard in God, beginning your prayer to annihilat your self before God,
entirely abandoning your self to him, to believe you are not idle whilst you do
this, tho you neither feel nor know any thing; but be in peace and contented to
be nothing in Gods presence. The arm that holds it self without motion dos it
do nothing? You abandoning all things, running to, and putting your self
continually in God, is it not to act after a divine manner? In a word God would
have you to be in the state you are, obey, and remain in peace.

2. Be not one of those souls, who reject all the good thoughts God gives them
to remain without action as they call it, and in pure passivenesse: which is an
error and a pure idleness; but when you feel your self moved to adore and
love God, and to abandon your self to him, receave humbly, and follow simply
this impulse, yet without tying your self to it, or desire of keeping or
augmenting it, and be equally contented to have or loose it, one is not to act
as of ones self, but to follow the impression of grace.

3. In fine, make it your employment, your repose, your satisfaction in prayer
to content God. Remain firm there to honor his greatness by the sense of your
nothing: and go from it entirely resolved to renounce your self in all things.

FOR MASS AND COMMUNION.
To which one must carry the state of a victime and the spirit of a Sacrifice.
1. O JESUS, victime of my salvation who offered your self as one for me; cause
all that is within me to become a victime of your love, and that I may be
entirely sacrificed to your good will and pleasure, and to your glory.

2. O God annihilated, crucified, and sacrificed for me; annihilate crucify and
sacrifice all that is humane sensible, and savours of self love in me.

3. O my JESUS you work miracles to put your self in a condition to enter into
my heart, work one more by gaining it entirely to your self; make an altar of it
where you may never cease to be offering your self a sacrifice to your Father;
sacrifice in me all that is not yours, that I may cease to be, and may expire
in you.

4. All in JESUS is a victime upon the Altar, all is there annihilated, all is
destroyed, nothing of him appears. Behold what I ought to be, to hear Mass
well, and to communicate as I ought. A simple faith ought to sacrifice the light
of my understanding; the love of the good will and pleasure of God, ought to
sacrifice the entire satisfaction of my heart; The respect to the presence of my
God ought to make me forget my self and to sacrifice my person entirely unto
him. O how glorious is it, to be the victime of a God; to destroy ones self for
him, and to expire in him.

5. During the time of Mass remain in the spirit of an united sacrifice;
annihilated and lost in JESUS; offered up for you upon the altar; the
abandoning your self, the silence and respect in presence of JESUS honoring
his Father after this manner, ought to be the foundation of all your
dispositions. Jn this manner did Mary assist at the bloody sacrifice of her son
upon the altar, her eyes and heart were fixed upon him by a simple reguard full
of respect and love, and it is after the same manner you ought to assist at
Mass.

6. O my JESUS, I consent to all that you do for me upon the altar, and I do
the same in you, and for you. All is yours o my love nothing but you, all for
you. What streams of blood; what wounds; what injuries do you my JESUS suffer
for so ungratfull a heart as mine is, my Jesus dies of love for me, and can I
still live to my self?

7. Go from Mass with peace, courage and a firm resolution to dye to all
things for JESUS, and to sacrifice to him all your satisfactions and humors,
this determination and this resolution is the true fruit of holy Mass; O my
soul thou must live no longer any other life but that which is crucified,
annihilated, and sacrificed to JESUS, become a victime for love of him.

For Communion.
1. It Is the end and fruit of a good communion, to receive a God, to live the
life of a God, to unite our selves to God, to be like JESUS by the assistance
of his grace, to have his sentiments his inclinations, and his qualities, to be
no more to ones self, and to live no other but such a supernatural and divine
life as that of JESUS.

2. O the infinite Majesty of a God! who dares approach you? Yet o Sovereign
love o infinite bounty of my God, who is able to be from you? You are in the
host for no other end but to enter into my heart, and take possession of it, you
burn with desire to be there received, you make it your delight to remain in
it; oh! come my JESUS; come presently into it, I burn with a desire to receive
you there, and to make you the God of my heart. Come thither to receive
yourself, and to love your self there, for I of my self am nothing, and can do
nothing, so I leave all to you, and will remain in my nothing in your presence.

3. O ye Seraphins that I had your respect! O Mary that I had your love! O my
heart what can you desire, love and breath after but your JESUS, I will live no
longer to my self I ought to be nothing to all things, and JESUS ought to be
all to me.

4. O my love enter into my heart to reign there absolutely, to possess it
alone; and to animate it with your self, let all within me give place to JESUS,
humor, satisfaction, pleasure, vanity, self love, let all give place to JESUS,
he is master here, he is the God of my heart.

5. Remain at the feet of JESUS as a Magdalen in silence, and as it were
retired into thy own nothing; let him give thanks and honor his Father in you,
let him consummat in your heart the holocauste of his love to which he will
join yours. O love, o lover, o God of love, live, reign, triumph, distroy
sacrifice in me all that is not your self.

6. When your state consists of pure faith in darkness and aridity, remain in
peace in it, and content your self to have JESUS within you; it is enough, it
is sufficient for you to have him; seek not a great many thoughts, nor many
acts to make known your gratitude and love to him, let him do what he pleases
in you. My God and my all let me only live for you, by you, and in you.

8. Going from communion remember that JESUS ought to act, speak and suffer in
you and by you. O tongue dyed with the blood of a God. O heart full of the
Majesty of God. O sense, o mind, o body, animated with the purity of a God, can
you tie your selves any longer to a creature.

FOR EXAMEN AND CONFESSION.
1. AFTER having examined for some time the voluntary imperfections that you
have fallen into, contrary to the light which God gave you, as also all the
unprofitable thoughts and reflections, the eagernesses and promtitudes of your
heart, the impatiences of your tongue, and the negligences of your actions,
employ your self in some of the ensuing thoughts.

2. Is it possible o my God that I should have displeased you? That I should
have the confusion to have prefered a bauble before you? How sorry am I to have
provoked your anger against me. O my JESUS punish me as you please; but pardon
me: I desire to satisfy your justice, but I cannot suffer the sight of your
anger against me.

3. Ah my JESUS what blood and tears have my infidelitys cost you? And how
little have they cost me? You dyed in pain to blot out my sins, and I will not
use the least violence to my self to overcome them. No my JESUS I will not
afflict or torment you any more by my sins, what pain soever I undergo.

4. O Goodness of my God, how long have you sought me? O patience of my God
how long have you waited for me? How long shall I continually contemn your
calls, your allurements, and your love? O sins, o infidelity, o baseness I
detest you because you injure my God.

5. Shall I allways be unfaithful to so many graces which you bestow upon me?
What? allways receive a thousand benefits from you, and allways render you a
thousand ingratitudes? Oh my JESUS pardon me. I dye with grief to have given
you so great and so just a displeasure.

6. Is it possible that for a nothing I have so offended you, o my dear JESUS.
How have I preferred a small satisfaction of my own to that of your heart. Yes
so long as I content my self in this effusion of heart, in this promptitude, in
this humoursome word, in this detraction, this resentment this liberty and
remissness; you behold me my JESUS, and say to me in my heart, is it because
you have a mind to displease me, to offend me, and to draw me from you, is it
that I am not better then this pleasure which moves you to sin? And I make
answer by my actions my JESUS, yes I love to content my self rather then to
please you. O love, o goodness contemned o heart of my JESUS, I deserve not
that you should receive me. But I hope all things of your mercy, and I protest
that you shall be all to me, and all things else shall be nothing.

7. Mortal sin mak's us loose gods favor, venial sin cools it, and di^ves
us from him, imperfection and the life of nature, stops and hinders us from
going to him; it renders his graces, his blood, his love, useless to our
salvation. O sin either grievous, or light, I have a greater horror of you
then of death, because you offend my God, I will hence forth live a life
altogether supernatural, and quite contrary to my own inclinations.

8. Remember that you reflect not to much upon your sins, and take care not to
disquiet your self for them. A simple and amourous return toward God within
you is sufficient; is it possible my God that I should have displeased you?
Behold this is what I can only do of my self, but it is that which I will
endeavor by the assistance of your grace to do no more. This suffices, then
forget all, and loose your self in God.

9. Make your confession after the clearest and shortest manner you are able,
and receive absolution with an interior sense of confusion, grief and love,
without designing to taste any sensibility.

10. Go from confession throuly penetrated with the goodness of a God who
presently pardons, and of your ingratitude, who continually offend him; and
remaining in his presence and in him, with a respectfull silence, let him take
possession of you, abandoning your self entirely to him. O bounty of my God,
possess my heart, o Justice of my God satisfy and content your self upon me.

For the employment and exterior occupations of the day.
1. ENDEAVOVR to perform all your actions in the presence of God, to content
God, and without contenting your self. Follow allways the will of God, and the
motions of his grace, and never incline to your own humor, to the end God may
live in you, and that he may act by you.

2. Be faithful by continually dying to all unprofitable reflections of your
mind, to hasty words, your humor, and the impatience of your tongue, to the
propensions vivacity of your nature, and be persuaded that the more faithful
you shall be in this, the more you will advance in your state: so that all your
application through out the day, is to possess your self, to be of an equal
temper, and to refrain in occasions what ever you shall perceive less perfect.

3. This fidelity of dying and of denying your self the least satisfaction or
effusion of heart toward creatures, will make you continually to go out of your
self, to loose your self in God, and to remain in him, and this is the true
effect of the state of faith, to which you are called, for the life of faith,
is to live not in ones self, nor for ones self, but in God, and for God.

4. In occasions where you shall find your heart or senses ready to satisfy
themselves in any curious book humorsome word, or promptitude, laet this word
alone put a stop to them. My God, my all, you alone suffice me, I desire
nothing but you. Or else; can I content my self, o my God in discontenting you?
o love of my God reign only in me, no more of creature, nor of human
satisfaction to a heart of which God is the master.

5. At any time when you have any thing to suffer, either by sickness, or
trouble of mind, or by the disquiets or contradictions of men, let this thought
presently calm your mind. You will have it so my God, be it so, content your
self, I am yours, being a thousand times happy in suffering to please you, and
in dying for you. Or else cast a simple reguard of confidence and resignation
upon a crucifix, or any Image of our Blessed Lady, or toward the blessed
Sacrement according to the place you shall be in, with this word, JESUS dies in
pains for me and would I suffer nothing for him? There can be no love without
sufferance, or no sufferance without love.

6. Leave your self thus in the hands of God to be crucifyd by a continual and
entire abandoning your self amidst all the contradictions and aridities from
within; this is the way devine truth takes to make a victime of you, he will
annihilat by little and little in you all that is of you.

7. Follow your affairs with a great liberty of mind, with a calm and
continual equallity of heart. Employ not your self in them for any other reason,
but because God would have you do so, and when he would have you do so. God is
content, and this is the word with which you are to support your self in them.

Simple reflections of faith upon a Crucifix.
1. WHat do you suffer my JESUS? and how little am I moved with your sufferings?
What pains? What injuries? and what blood do you shed for an ungratfull
creature?

2. You dye my JESUS, you dye of grief for me, and can I live to my self or
live without suffering for you? Can I live without a Cross? o what lost moments
are these, in which I suffer not for you, o let me suffer or dye.

3. O wounds, o nails, o thorns, o torments, o Cross, what pain do you give
to my JESUS, o my Savior what confusion ought I to have, seeing you suffer
thus much? Yet what grief ought I not to have that I am the cause of your
sufferings.

4. Behold my soul the work of thy infidelityes; and the love of a God, cease
then to satisfye thy self, to content thy dying JESUS.

Advices.
1. EVERY night, cast some one of these simple reguards upon your crucifix
after your examen, for a short space, one alone suffices each time, and even
one word of each.

2. Make use of these aspirations in prayer, and when you are at Mass, being
troubled or oppressed, to support your self.

3. Read them often in the day time, especially the last, and the other before
Mass and prayer.

Aspirations to be made at all times to recollect ones self in God.
FOR RISING.
1. MY God, and my all. 2. All to you, my God, all in you, all by you.
FOR PRAYER.
1. Content your self my God. 2. My God my all. 3. You my God are all, and I am
nothing. 4. You my God behold me, and will have me be as I am, therefore I
desire to be so. 5. I come not hither to content my self but to content God. 6.
O the good will and pleasure of my God, I Sacrifice my self: entirely to you.
For the employments and exterior occupations of the day.
1. GOd is content, this is my joy, and my sole happiness.

2. O my God would I content my self, and displease you?

3. All to you my God, all for you, all in you;

4. God alone suffices me, all else is nothing to me.

5. The more we dye to our selves, the more me shall live in God.

6. Let us go my soul; let us go and loose our selves in God, let us cease to
be, to the end that God may be all in us.

7. What do I desire in heaven, or on earth? but you o the God of my heart, my
Portion for Eternity.

An Elevation to the Sacred hearts of JESUS and MARY, to obtain the love of God.
O Inflamed hearts living with love! o Sanctuaries of the divinity! temples of
the Sovereign Majesty, Altars of Divine Charity! hearts that burn with love for
God and me; I honor you, I love you, and I melt with love and respect in your
presence, I unite my self to your holy dispositions, I will yes I will burn
with your fire, and live with your life, what joy have I to se you happy, and
content; what part do I take in your graces, in your sorrows, and in your
glory? with how good a heart would I dye and suffer all things rather then
displease you. O my heart we must act no longer but according to the
inclinations of these sacred hearts, you ought to expire in silence in their
presence to all that is human of natural in you.

2. O that I were able to engage all the hearts of mankind to render homage to
the heart of JESUS and MARY, and to form themselves according to their divine
modelle, o hearts full of grace, purity, fervor, and humility, inspire my heart
with these sentiments, I unite my self to you, I loose my self in you, I will
live no more but by you, and for you.

3. Thus all the employment of my heart shall be from hence forward to remain in
silence and respect, annihilated in the presence of JESUS and MARY, and there
(as a burning lamp that consumes it self before the Blessed Sacrament) to burn
to suffer and to dye. Be it so

The holy Mother of God has lately promised to one of her Children, that
whoever shall say the following Prayer with devotion, if they be in the grace
of God she shall augment the divine love in their hearts, at each of these
twelve salutations and benedictions, which it contains, and if they are in
mortal sin, with her sweet and Virginal hand she will knock at the door of
their hearts, at each salutation, to excite them to open unto grace; and she
added that when one should find any persons in great sins and hard to be
converted, that it would be good to excite them to say this prayer with a good
will, or at least to consent to have it said for them: mervelous effects of it
have lately been seen in several persons;

1. Hail MARY Daughter of God the Father.

2. Hail MARY Mother of God the Son.

3. Hail MARY Spouse of God the Holy Ghost.

4. Hail MARY Temple of the Divinity.

5. Hail MARY Beautiful Lilly of the most resplendent Trinity.

6. Hail MARY sweet Rose to all the Celestial Court.

7. Hail MARY Virgin of Virgins powerful Virgin, full of sweetness and
humility, of whom the King of heaven would be born and of whose milk he would
be nourished.

8. Hail MARY Queen of Martyrs, whose soul was pierced with the sword of
sorrow.

9. Hail MARY Lady and Mistress of the world to whom all power has been given
both in heaven and earth.

10. Hail MARY Queen of my heart, my Mother my life, my sweetness and my love.

11. Hail MARY most amiable Mother.

12. Hail MARY most admirable Mother.

MARY full of Grace our Lord be with thee.

1. Blessed art thou amongst women.

2. Blessed is the fruit of thy womb JESUS CHRIST.

3. Blessed be thy Spouse Saint Joseph.

4. Blessed be thy Father Saint Ioachim.

5. Blessed be thy Mother Saint Anne.

6. Blessed be thy Son Saint John.

7. Blessed be thy Angel Saint Gabriel.

8. Blessed be the Eternal Father who has chosen the.

9. Blessed be thy Son who has loved the.

10. Blessed be the Holy Ghost who has espoused the.

11. O most happy Virgin let all that love you, bless you,

12. Bless us o Holy Virgin together with your Son, so be it.

FINIS.

