A LAMENTACION (By one of Englands Prophets) Over the Ruins OF this oppressed
Nation, To be deeply laid to heart by Parliament and Army, and all sorts of
Peeple, lest they be swept away with the Besom of Destruction, in the Day of
the Lords fierce wrath and Indignation, which is near at hand.

Written by the movings of the Lord in James Nayler.

AND A WARNING TO the Rulers of England Not to usurp Dominion over the
Conscience, nor to give forth Laws contrary to that in the Conscience.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord in George Fox.

Printed for Tho: Wayt at his house in the Pavement in York. 1653.

A LAMENTACION By one of Englands Prophets, over the Ruins of this oppressed
NATION, to be deeply laid to heart by Parliament and Army, and all sorts of
People, lest they be swept away with the Besom of Destruction, in the day of
the Lords fierce wrath and indignation, which is near at hand.
OH England! how is thy expectation failed now after all thy travails? the
People to whom Oppression and Unrighteousness has been a Burden, have long
waited for Deliverance, from one year to another, but none comes, from one sort
of men to another.

Have thou looked for Reformation, but all in vain! for as power has come into
the hands of men, it has been turned into violence, and the will of men is
brought forth instead of Equity, and this they seek to establish by a Law, to
which all must bow that are under them, or they must be judged as Offenders, so
that which should be for Deliverance of the simple from the hand of the
oppressor, is turned into a snare to entrap the righteous, and he that turns
from iniquity is made a prey to the wicked, and none lays it to heart through
the Nation, for all hearts are full of oppression, and all hands are full of
violence, their houses are filled with oppression* their Streets and Markets
abound with it, their Courts which should afford remedy against it, are wholly
made up of iniquity and injustice, and the Law of God is made altogether void*
and truth is trodden under foot, and plainness is become odious to the proud,
and Deceit set on high, and the proud are counted happy, and the rich are
exalted above the poor, and look to be worshipped as God, which if any refuse a
snare is laid, and Bonds and Imprisonment is appointed for them, as not worthy
to breathe in the air, and no Law, Equity, nor Justice can be heard for their
freedom: and this is not done by an open Enemy, for then it had not bin so
strange unto thee, but it is done by those who pretend to be against
oppression; and for whom under that pretense thou have adventured all that is
dear unto thee, to put power into their hands; and now thou cryest to them for
help, but find none that can deliver thee; Oh foolish People, when will ye
learn wisdom? when will ye cease from man, who is vanity, and the sons of men
who are become a Ly?

Are not these the choicest of thy Worthies, who are now in power? Has it not
been the top of thy desires and labors to see it in their hands? and are not
they now become weak as other men, and the Land still in travel, but nothing
brought forth but wind? How is the wisdom of the wise turned into folly, and
the understanding of the prudent hid! How is he who seemed valiant for general
freedom fallen into a particular earthly interest, and has no power to help
himself! Would any have believed that these should have fallen in the Pit, and
stuck in the Mire, as they who were before them, whose names are made a
reproach in the Nation! how have these cried out for the Kingdom of Christ, to
bear rule in his Church, and consciences of his own, above the wills of proud
oppressing Tyrants, yea and have been Instruments to execute Gods decree upon
such as have withstood the freedom of the righteous seed; but now what is
brought forth by them more than words! do not the members of Christly still
under the power of the oppressor, cast into holes and Prisons for the Truths
sake, and are denied that liberty they allow to thieves and murderers, though
the breach of no just Law can be laid to their charge, neither will they let
them come to trial, left by their own Law they should be forced to free them;
and how long some have layn upon this account you are not ignorant.

Woe is me for you Rulers, how are you fallen from what you have professed, when
you your selves were sufferers under such bondage! and now is it nothing to you
that your Brethren who have been one with you against oppression, now perish
under the hand of the same men, from whom you are set free! and do not the same
men judge us now for offenders, and does it not concern you to see what is the
cause why they thus vent their envy against the innocent, and their Lives and
Libertyes are taken away in close holes and dungeons, when it is your duty and
in your power to see them have justice, according to the Law of God which you
profess, and not after men's wills: and if you know the offenses for which they
thus suffer, how is it that that which Christ does command and the Saints did
practice is now become so heinous offenses that nothing will serve but
perpetual Imprisonment in close holes without hearing or trial! and that you
may see for what these despised ones do suffer under you, consider their
crimes, whereof the greatest of them is, that some of them are moved to go into
the Idols Temples, to dispute and reason with them who uphold the Idols
worship, and to call the People out of it, unto the worship in Spirit; and
though this seem a heinous crime to you, yet it was the practice of the
Apostles and Saints as is plain in Scripture.

Others suffer because they cannot break the express commands of God, to give
that worship to proud men, which God Almighty has forbidden to give to any
Creature in Heaven or in Earth, but only to himself; and here may all the
heathen Rulers condemn you, who never imprisoned nor fined Christ nor his
Saints for this, though the Scripture says, they respected no man's person, nor
did they bow down nor give worship to the Creature, though the Devil the father
of pride tempted to it then as well as now.

Others suffer for confessing the Name of Christ, and witnessing him in them in
their measure, as they find him manifest in them to overcome sin, the world,
and the Devil, and reconcile them to God, and this is called Blasphemy, and so
proceeded against, though the Saints have always witnessed the same, and it
stands in Scripture for a witness against you* and says Christ, He that denies
me before men, him will I deny before my Father; and thus the practice of the
Saints was and is counted Blasphemy by the professors of the world.

Others suffer for denying to swear at the commands of men, after the customs
of the world, when Christ says, Swear not at all, for what is more than Yea
and Nay comes of evil; and the Apostles warns the Saints above all things
not to swear by any Oath whatsoever, which all that have entered into Christ
have denied, for he is the Oath and Covenant of God forever.

Others suffer because they are moved of the Lord to go into the Streets and
Markets to declare against all manner of sin which abounds there, and to call
all to repentance, and to declare the great day of the Lord at hand, and his
wrath to be revealed upon such abominable practices: and a snare is laid for
him that reproves in the gate, and they suffer as disturbers of the Peace, but
what Peace is this which is disturbed by the crying out against sin? but
Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Ballad-sellers, are suffered in the streets and
markets, and are not counted Disturbers of the Peace: Is this the Saints Peace
which stands in Righteousness, or the Worlds Peace, upholden by man of sin?

Others whom the Lord has called to leave houses and land, wives and children,
fathers and mothers, and has in love to poor souls sent them out, to declare
his love to the world, and the glad tidings of the Gospel freely, these are
taken under the name of wanderers and strangers, because they have no earthly
possessions amongst you; some of them by your Law you imprison, some you whip
out of your Towns, some are beaten, stoned, and shamefully entreated, though
they ask you nothing, neither are free to receive any thing from the world, if
they would give them, but do wait on their Father for food who sends them their
journey, and thus you entertain strangers, contrary to the practice of all the
Saints in all Ages, and the commands of God and the Apostles, who warned not to
forget to entertain strangers, for some thereby have entertained Angels
unawares, but as the men of Sodom did compass Lots house, who had entertained
strangers, so do these compass the houses where these are, threatening to pull
down the houses and dash their brains against the stones in the wall, and this
is done when such are with them, who go under the name of Magistrates and
Ministers, and the innocent are haled out and sent to Prison, though nothing
can be charged against them but as strangers, who have no habitation among
them. And for such offenses as these do the poor despised little ones of Christ
suffer the worst sort of Imprisonments that can be invented, in dark holes,
under Tyrants, who will not suffer their Brethren to visit them, and all this
while all manner of sin at liberty, and Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, and
Whoremongers, and such like men of Belial, are become the fittest men to be set
up to witness against the innocent, and many of those who sit to judge them are
guilty of diverse of the foremencioned crimes themselves; and thus the wicked
are set up to make the Righteous offenders for a word, who are none in deed,
nor can they be convinced of the breach of any just Law; and this is not done
in secret that you know not of. Oh you that bear rule in the Nation, and ought
to relieve such, for then might you have an excuse, but it is done in the
Cities, County, Towns, and Courts, where Justice ought to relieve such; and you
know this and are silent, but it is that you may be left without excuse, at the
great Day of Account, which is near at hand, even the Day of Sions recompense,
which has long been trodden under foot by the earthly powers! and now will you
profess your selves to be Christians, the Scripture your Rule, or so much as
talk of the practices of the Saints, when such works as these are found amongst
you, which were acted by the Heathens, and formal Professors against the
Saints, but never practiced by the Saints against any; neither have you any
ground for them in Scripture: O how will you appear before the Almighty, whose
professions and practices are so unsuitable, and justice and mercy is talked of,
but not brought forth.

Woe, woe, woe unto you, who have not used your power to relieve the oppressed, do
you thus requite the Lord, who has set you free from your Enemies, and has
set you to rule for him over his People! Is this according to your promises
made to him in the day of your fears, when you were little in your own eyes, and
now that he has set you free, and you are exalted, shall his poor simple
little ones suffer in bondage under you, as under the Tyrants and Bishops
before you, and you not once say they are our Brethren* nor your hearts pity
them! Are you building your Houses, and setting your Nests on high, and Sion
lies waste, trodden upon!

Woe is me for you, you high ones, how are you fallen from that tenderness I
have seen in some of you, when you were sufferers with the People of God! but
now the sufferings of the Saints are made a talk at your feasts to fill your
mouths with laughter; and you can eat and drink and rise up to play, and
stretch your selves upon your Beds of ease, but the afflictions of your
Brethren are not laid to heart. Woe to you that are at ease while the simple are
ensnared by their Enemies, God is highly displeased with you and he will not
establish you, who have neglected mercy and justice. Hearken O ye Priests, and
give ear O house of the King, for judgment is toward you, who have been a
snare upon Mispah, and a net spread upon Mount Tabor, to catch the innocent,
you have not been careful to relieve others when you had power, neither shall
you deliver your own selves at that day: You are seeking to be high, but you
shall find one above you who is angry with the proud, and will bring down the
mighty from their seats, that he may relieve the oppressed, and let the
Prisoners go free, and the Lamb shall take the Kingdom. How are you deceived
who have sometimes been the wisdom of the Nations; in that you have pulled down
others, and set your selves in the same heigh! how is your judgment failed you,
to think that all this shaking and overturning has no further end but to set
up flesh, and to exalt one man to rule over the conscience of another by his
own will, where Christ should reign as King for ever! do you here as you would
be done by, do you not act contrary to the Scriptures, and practice of all the
holy men of God, who durst never sit in the Throne of Christ, persecute or
imprison any for Conscience. Oh that you had taken council at the fear of God,
then had you stood in your places, and should have known his secrets, and that
his intent is only to exalt his Son in Spirit, in the fall of proud flesh, so
should you have used all your power to make way for his Kingdom, and you also
to have cast down your Crowns at his feet, so should you have been established
in his power, a terror to the wicked, removers of oppression, and makers up of
the breach, and your names a blessing to generations: but now that oppression
is found with you in as much as the poor despised little flock of Christ has
suffered under you, as under those whom the Lord removed before, when it has
been in your hands to relieve them, and you have not done it, and you that have
so much cried up the Kingdom of Christ in words, and yet have been bold to
limit him in his Kingdom, (the Consciences of his Saints) therefore above all
the rest you shall not escape unpunished, for the Lord looked that you who have
seen his love and pity to you, in setting you above your Enemies and Fears,
should now have had pity on your Brethren, and walked humbly before him; and
for that end he put power into your hands, and removed those that were before
you, and left none to oppose you, that you might freely act in mercy and
judgment and righteousness, but seeing you have forgotten the Lord and his work
which to you* ward was good, and are become exceeding high, and cruel as
others, and the poor are not delivered by you from the hand of the oppressor
and him that is too strong for him, neither have you cheerfully gone on in
unity, in the work of the Lord and his will but stand up in your own wills,
opposing the deliverance of the righteous seed. Therefore now will I arise,
says the Lord, who have long holden my peace, for I am full of jealousy for
Sion who is trodden upon, and I will appear for her in the midst of her Enemies,
and I will gather the outcasts thereof, who have not been regarded, but have
been scattered by you, as the offscouring of the world, and as you have
scattered and not pityed, so shall you be scattered, and none shall pity you;
for the worlds outcasts are my jewels, and I will bring them to possess the
gates of their Enemies: Even by the word of the Almighty shall this be
accomplished, the Day is near at hand.

Wherefore awake all you to whom oppression is a burden, whom the proud have
trodden upon, and you have been as people without hope, neither have known any
way to look for help, for every man has become vain: Now arise up out of all
your earthly expectations, and stand up to meet the Lord our Righteousness, who
is risen to deliver his people, the promised seed who is in Covenant with him,
and to gather them from among the heathen and them that have made prey upon
them, because they have not known him who will save them. And now look no more
to the Arm of Flesh for Freedom, for therein has been your woe, but wayt for
the Deliverer out of Sion, the Ancient of Days, and God of Isreal's seed, who
has letten you see the emptyness of all created helps to which your eyes have
been looking that you might return, and complain to him only, who is the
Fountain from whom all his find pity.

And now a word to the wise amongst you, for as much as the Lord has showed me
that there is a Seed amongst you, whose hearts are not wholly hardened, nor
have wilfully stoped your ears against the Cry of the oppressed, nor have been
consenting to the cruelty that has been acted and is intended against the
innocent; to you I say arise and deliver your selves from the guilt of
Oppression, and Cruelty of these men, and humble your selves before the Lord,
that you may receive wisdom from him, and boldness to declare against all
violence and injustice, and set your selves to deliver the oppressed to the
utmost, that you may be hid, and have a sure house, and be established: take
heed that you walk not by example of others, but in the light of Christ which
guides the conscience, and that will keep you tenderhearted in bowels of mercy
to all, and let it not seem strange to you to see others wholly set on
mischief, but consider, could ever any of your cruel oppressors believe, though
God has always sent to warn them before the judgment come, that thereby he
might leave them without excuse, and be clear when he comes to take vengeance,
but they have hardened themselves against all reproof: and marvel not to see it
so at this day, for the seed of the proud is but one in all ages. Wherefore
mind the fear of God and his Law, and consent not to any thing because of a
multitude, but for Righteousness and Equityes sake; and having Righteousness
before you fear not the face of any, nor the reproach of men, but be valiant
for the truth, the glory of God, and freedom of every oppressed one, and
victory is before you, if you be faithful; and the Lord God Almighty bless,
prosper, and guide all the faithful among you, to keep clear out of all the
consultations of the wicked, that you may never consent to any thing but what
is of God, warranted in Scriptures, and practiced by the Saints, that you may
no longer rest in a Profession of what the Saints were, and act to the contrary
but that you may come to be guided in all things by the same Spirit, kept out
of all the wisdom of the world, and the fear of God be amongst you.

Written by the movings of the Lord in one that pityes the Ruins of the
Nation; for want of Righteousness, Justice, and Mercy, whom the World calls
James Nayler.
Westmerland, the 9th Month 1653.
A Warning to the Rulers of ENGLAND. Not to usurp Dominion over the Conscience,
nor to give forth Laws contrary to that in the Conscience.
THe Law it was added because of transgression, it came not by the will of man,
but was revealed to Moses of God, and is perfect according to that in the
conscience, it was added because of transgressors, who walk contrary to that in
the conscience, which is pure of God, there is the seat of blasphemy, he speaks
what he is not, and what he does not, and speaks evil of those things he knows
not, and he that acts contrary to that in the conscience acts contrary to the
perfect Law of God, and there he lives in the lust, when the Law says thou
shall not lust; he that lusts goes forth, he steals, he covets his
neighbors wife, and his neighbors goods, he kills and does murder, and he
goes forth and breaks the Sabbath, and he that breaks one breaks all; and here
the righteous Law takes hold upon him, that is perfect, and slays him.

But he that dwells in that which is pure, exercising the conscience toward God
and man, the Law takes not hold upon him, it was not made for such the
righteous, but for the sinners: and who are without the fear of the Lord casts
this Law behind their backs, and who respects persons, and his mind that
lusts and goes forth from the pure in this conscience, there the spirit is
erred into the earth and for the earth, as Balaams was, then that mind speaks
evil of the truth.

And this Law is made already, which is the Law of God, and need not be made
again; but all are to wait to receive it, which is perfect and is a ground
against all unrighteousness and Sinners: where it is received it is understood,
what it takes hold upon, which was added because of Transgressors, not for the
Righteous, but it preserves the Righteous, and gives way for the Truth, it
meddles not with the Righteous as laying any thing upon them, for it does not
respect any man's Person, it takes hold upon all who act contrary to that in the
Conscience: it does not meddle with that in the Conscience which is pure, which
is perfect, that is its own, and that says the Law is holy, just, and good, in
its place, but it is for them which are without, and it does not speak evil of
the Magistrates which are in this Law and have received it which is perfect,
but of the Evil the Law judges, which is perfect, but it exalts justice, and
dominion; Dominion which is according to the Soul, and that in the Conscience,
it is for the keeping them who act contrary to that in the Conscience in order,
a limit to the Lust, for it says, Thou shall not Lust, (for who act contrary
to that in the Conscience run out of Order) that there shall be none that abuse
themselves with mankind, no Fighter, and how full is the Land of them! nor no
respecters of Persons, and all who acts according to this in the Conscience:
that in the Conscience is but one, in it there is no damnable Heresy, nor no
Blasphemy, nor no licencious practices, for they arise out of that nature that
acts contrary to that in the Conscience, without the fear of the Lord, and that
speaks evil of Magistrates and Magistracy, and destroys the Commonwealth,
for this in the Conscience guids into the fear of the Lord.

Now you not having received this perfect Law, but making Laws in your wills
and minds contrary to this in the Conscience, and above this in the
Conscience; who acts according to that in the Conscience cannot submit to them,
for those Laws are changable, but this is for ever, which was added because of
Transgressors, and takes hold upon the Sinners and Transgressors outward, to
the hewing down of such.

But you that go to make Laws in your wills against the Righteous, and meddle
with the Righteous, and them that act according to that in the Conscience,
which is according to the Law, of God, which is perfect, and for ever, the Law
of God will hew you all down, which is for ever, as it has done many
generacions before you: and the righteous Seed suffered in all generacions by
such Laws, therefore to that in your Consciences I speak to wait upon the
Lord, that you may receive the Law of God, which is pure, which is just, which
is perfect according to that in the Conscience, for there is Woes and Plauges
gone out against this Nation, lest you be swept away with the seed of evil
doers and in the way as your Fathers who have transgressed the pure Law, and
that in the Conscience, and stroven with the Law which is in the will, to keep
down that in the Conscience; for there At the second Session of Parliament, in
the first year of Mary, Chap. ^.
has been a Law and an Act made, which Act did the Martyrs suffer by in Queen
Maryes days, who was the maintainer of Popery: this has the English Ministry
who profess the Ministry of Christ got to limit the Spirit of the Lord, to keep
them in their Pulpits and it has been their Guard; and they cry against Popery,
and themselves maintain the Popish Law, to prison and to persecute them that
have the Life of the Scriptures made manifest in them.

Oh never profess Christ, and guard your Church and Ministry as you call it,
with a Popish Antichristian Law, let this never be mentioned in Ages to come as
it is mentioned in this Age, how many have suffered by her Law, and suffers now,
and yet you cry up the Gospel, and cry against such as act according to that in
the Conscience; but this is a shame to those who have received the Gospel of
Christ, and walk in the Spirit that gave forth the Scripture, and have the pure
Law of God, whereby many have been imprisoned, and are Prisoned.

Now consider and see your selves, if you have not made and maintained this Act
against the Scripture, when the Scripture says, If any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, let the first hold his Peace, for ye may all speak one
by one, and the Teachers of the World, put up Peticions to you, against them
who have been moved of the Lord to speak his word; so here Teachers and you who
be in Authority you both act against Scripture, your Law it is against the
Scripture, and their Teaching is against the Scripture, and so its just with
God to hew you all down together, for the Minister of God said, You may all
Prophesy one by one: if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, let the
first hold his Peace: and Moses gave that Liberty, who had received the Law
from God: and that was in all the Churches of the Saints, that they might speak
one by one,

Now here you that make a Law contrary to that in the Conscience, and you that
put up Peticions for a Law, have cleared your selves, both makers of the Law,
and seekers for the Law, not to have the Spirit of Moses, and his Laws which
are perfect, and not to have the Spirit of the Minister of God, of Paul, who
gave that Freedom, that all may speak one by one, and here ye do limit the
Holy One and the Spirit of the Lord God; and so ty People up in Forms and
Sects, and bring up damnable Heresies, and Blasphemies, who bring People
contrary to that in the Conscience, for that is but one in ten-thousand, and is
according to the Law of God, which is perfect, and the Law of God takes not
hold upon that, (A warning to you all, and be warned and fear God)

Now in the Church of God, where they spoke one by one, there was no disorder
nor distraction, where all were guided by one Spirit; the Law has nothing to do
with the Church of God that is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and they are in
Peace and Unity, and the Law was never made for such, Christ is the Head of the
Church, the Head of the Body, who is the end of the Law, and therefore silence
all Flesh (who would make a Law upon Christ) from making Laws for the Church
of Christ: The perfect Law of God takes hold upon such who are Murderers, who
act unrighteousness, them that abuse themselves with Mankind, them that are
without, and act without, and you that meddle with the Church of Christ, and
that in the Conscience; the Law you have not received from God, but the Plauges
will be poured upon you: The Law of God is contrary to that in your Wills,
according to that in the Conscience, and they are both perfect, and it is not
known but as it is revealed, and the minister of God is perfect, according to
that in the Conscience, and it owns the perfect Law, for the Minister of God is
to bring from under all Sin, and the ocasion of all Laws, and this we witness,
yea Thousands! Praised be the Lord for ever.

They that fear the Lord they have mutual Peace among themselves, you need not
make a Law for them; for the Law is upon them that are without the fear of God,
and there is the disturbance, and such the Law takes hold upon,

And as touching preventing the abusing and evil speaking of Magistrates, there
need not be a Law upon them that fear the Lord, for they are taught by the
Spirit of the Lord, that in the Conscience, to fear the Lord and own the
perfect Law which is holy, just, and good in its place; and own justice and the
Dignity and Dominion; but as it was in the time of Jude, such Teachers as went
in the way of Cain to envy and after the error of Balaam, who perish in the
gainsaying of Core, what they spoke they knew naturally, and in those things
they corrupted themselves, as England has many of such who have told us that
Hebrew and Greek has been the Original, and the Steeplehouse has been the
Church and the Temple, and sprinkling Infants has been the Baptism, and the
Letter has been the Light, and the Letter has been the Word, and those are the
Teachers that were made Ministers at Oxford and Cambridg, by the will of man;
but we find these things all natural, and the natural man knows not the things
of God, but they are known naturally, and keeps People natural, and knowing
these things are contrary to the Scripture, therefore do we trample upon them,
and deny them; and the Magistrate having his Law changeable, (not receiving the
Law from God which is perfect and endures for ever) and not according to that
in the conscience, and according to the Scripture, but would limit the Spirit
of the Lord, we deny them and that which is contrary to the soul, and contrary
to that in the conscience, but that which is according to the soul and that in
the conscience we own and honor in our souls, for that is perfect and endures
for ever, and does not speak evil of Dignity nor of Dominion, and to that the
soul must be subject: but as touching the Ministry which I said we trampled
upon, which is natural, we having received the same spirit according to the
measure that gave forth the Scripture, by which we are baptized into one Body,
so with that we deny their sprinkling of Infants, which they call Baptism,
because there is no example for it in the Scripture; and that spirit that gave
forth the Scripture said, the Church is in God, and therefore we deny the
Church of the world which is natural, and they that were made Ministers were
made by the will of God and not by the will of man, and so do we; and the
Letter says Christ is the Light, and they that say the Letter is the Light
would disthrone Christ, and they that say the Letter is the Word sets it up
before God, and denies God, for the Letter says God is the Word, and they that
say the Hebrew and Greek are the Original, they who were the Ministers of the
Word, which was in the beginng, before many Languages were, spoke the Word
among the Hebrews and were persecuted; now if the Hebrew had been the Original
they would have received them; and the Apostle he spoke among the Greeks and
they counted the Cross of Christ a foolish thing: now had that been the
Original Hebrew and Greek they would have embraced it: the Eternal Word which
was in the beginning before all Languages were, breaks in pieces all Languages
and tramples upon them, and brings all into one Language, for that which keeps
in many Languages keeps in confusion, and always learning, therefore with the
Word which ever was, which is made manifest, which gathers our hearts together
to God, we deny their Original; for the Apostle he denied all his Learning when
he came to know the Word which was and is the Original which endures for ever.
And as touching giving fitting liberty for them that fear the Lord, for that
you have no ground in the Scripture, for if you go to meddle with them that
fear the Lord with your Law, you busy your selves with those things that you
have nothing to do withal; to that in your consciences I speak, for you have
nothing to do to meddle with them that act according to that in the conscience,
and act in righteousness; and as giving liberty for such, you are them that
would limit the holy One, and ty up and prison that in the conscience; he that
meddles with that in the conscience goes about to search the heart, and where
it acts forth you will have a Law to act upon it, when it acts contrary to your
wills for that in the conscience is perfect, is pure, it testifies against all
opinions, and all Sects, and all Heresy, and all Blasphemy, and all false
Ministry, and all popish ways, for they all arise out of that nature which acts
contrary to that in the conscience, and that in the conscience is according to
God, and he that makes a Law upon that makes a Law against God, and he that is
guided by this in the conscience to walk toward God and man, the flesh is not
defiled; he speaks not evil of Dignity; and there is no man with his will has
any thing to do to restrain or give liberty for this; and where have you an
example for this in all the Scripture, or Moses who was a Minister of the Law,
who had received it from God, that restrained any man's conscience, and he
wished that all the Lords people were Prophets; and the Minister of God said,
Ye may all speak one by one; and ye need not care for an Act or Declaration as
touching them, and for shame let it never be mentioned that there should be a
Law for them that fear God as if there were disturbance among them, or as if
they were not in a mutual peace; but these are such Teachers that desire such
things that have the likeness of a Church, the likeness of a Baptism, the
likeness of a Ministry, and the likeness of a Communion, and when any has been
moved of the Lord to go speak against them, they have openly showed themselves
to be quite without the fear of the Lord, and strangers to the life that gave
forth the Scriptures, Priests, Magistrates, and People; for Moses said, he would
that all the Lords people were Prophets; and the Apostle said, Ye may all
prophecy one by one; and when these things have been practiced according to
the Scripture, they who have been moved by the Spirit that is unlimited, to
speak the Word of the Lord as it was revealed, this the Magistrate he has
limited with his Law and sent them to Prison; here the Law is against Scripture
and that Spirit that gave it forth: I charge you in the presence of the Lord,
and against the Ministers of God that had the Law of God, and said, Ye may all
prophecy; and here you Minsters that desire this Law are against Scriptures
and the Apostles, and clear your selves from having the Spirit, and your
Churches to be no Churches; for when the Word of the Lord is spoken, some fall
a striking, some a punching, beating, haling, throwing down, and lays for dead,
and the Law of God is perfect, and gives freedom to speak what is revealed from
God, and it hears with patience, and the Minister of God gives freedom to speak
what is revealed.

And you that say you will make Laws according to the pattern of Moses, for you
to go act according to Moses Law word by word, and to take up the Form and not
have it revealed to you, as it was to him, you are to be denied, as having the
Form without the power, and to be turned away from; Oh therefore fear the Lord
God and mind that in the conscience, which is pure, which will teach you the
fear of the Lord, and bring you to receive the Law from God, and the power,
then you may give it forth to others, but not till then; would you have a Law
now made contrary to your wills upon you, the Law of God is upon you, and will
be for ever, who acts contrary to that in the conscience, the Law of God is to
keep perfect, it takes hold upon that which acts contrary to that which is
perfect, and the Minister of God is to present every one perfect, and to bring
from under the occasion of all Laws.

A word from the Lord. Friends, take heed of making any Law contrary to that in
the conscience, for if you do, it will be against God* and God will hew down it
and you with his Sword, for it is drawn out of the sheath and furbished, and
fit to slay Noblemen and great men, Captains beware, be low, mind that in your
consciences which is of God, to guide your minds up to God; fear and beware of
the Sword, for its drawn out against you, lest it come upon you, and wait in
that which is pure in your consciences to rise and guide your minds to God,
and cry for justice, and walk in it, for whatsoever is not just and justice,
must be hewn down, that justice may stand up, which is according to that in
the conscience which is pure of God, for now God alone will be exalted, and
that which is exalted must be thrown down and all the loftiness of men shall be
laid low, and the haughtyness of men shall be brought down, and the glory of
man, and his honor and renoun shall be laid in the dust, and the glory of the
Lord shall arise, and his Majesty, to shake terribly the earth, and the Idols
of Gold and Silver shall be cast away, as the carnal part is destroyed, all
your Idols will cease, and the pure God be exalted and loved.

Oh Friends, make not Laws in your own wills for they that did, ever slew the
just, and had a Prison for Christ, where he was made manifest, and the Prophets
and Apostles suffered by their Laws who were made in their wills, for witnessing
forth a good conscience many suffered death, for they said they had a Law, if
any one said he was the Son of God, he might die, and so the Law in the will
does persecute the Son of God now where he is made manifest, as the North part
of this Nation does witness, who has fulfilled that Law in persecuting and
imprisoning the Son of God where he is made manifest. And Paul when he was
brought from the Temple outward, and the Priests outwardly, for that Seperacion
and witnessing a good Conscience toward God and man, he suffered, so their
Laws being in their Wills, took hold upon him for acting from a pure
Conscience, so it does now upon the same: O therefore wait upon the Lord for
directions, that your Laws may be according to that in the Conscience, and
against that which is contrary to a pure Conscience; as the Law of God was
added not for the Righteous, but for Sinners: the just Law takes hold upon
them, and this Law is not according to the Will of man, neither is Christ
according to the will of man, who fulfils this Law in man, and takes away the
ground and the occasion of the Law, which the Law is upon, therefore mind that
which is contrary to your Wills, to receive the Law of God, which is contrary to
man's will, which is perfect and received from God, and has power over a man as
long as he lives.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord; a friend to your souls and your eternal
good, and the establishing of Righteousness, and the pefect Law of God, to the
intent of cleansing the Land of Evell-doers, and the Transgressors of the
perfect Law of God: And who knows this, are come out of Egypt, Pharaoh nor none
of his Host knows it, nor the Egyptians, but who are brought out of Egypt:
So God Almighty bless and direct you all, who have a fear and thirst toward
him, for this is the Day of your visitacion, while you have time prize it,

George Fox.
From Westmerland the later end of the month called November. 1653.
These Papers were prepared and intended to have been delivered to every member
of Parliament, but before they could be got out the Parliament dissolved.


