THE NARRATIVE Of the most Material PROCEEDINGS AT THE SESSIONS For LONDON and
MIDDLESEX, Begun July the Seventh, 1680.
Giving an Account of the Proceedings against John Giles, for being one of
those that made the late barbarous Attempt upon Justice ARNOLD.
As also of diverse other persons Convicted of several Murders, Robberies on the
Highway, Burglaries, and other Felonies; and all other remarkable Trials
there: together with the Names and Crimes of all that received Sentence of
Death; the Number of those burnt in the Hand, etc.
THe first Trial of note was of a Woman-Servant, who had robbed her Master, at
several times, of a very great Sum of Money: The Gentleman missed about Six
hundred pounds, but the Prisoner had Confessed Two hundred, which she purloyn'd
by the help of a false Key to his Closer. Yet now she would seem to deny all,
and lay it upon some other persons belonging to the Family; but the Crime was
too apparent to be evaded, and so she was found Guilty.

John Moor and Thomas Sides were Arraigned and Tried on several Indictments;
First for breaking open the Warehouse of Mr. Samuel Harris in
Bartholomew-Close. The matter appeared to be thus; On the 23th of June last,
these Fellows having, it is probable, observed this Warehouse to be
well-furnisht with Stuffs, and no body to lie in it, (for Mr. Harris's house
was elsewhere at a distance) they came about four of the Clock in the Morning
and broke it open, and carried away Bundles of Stuff; which a Neighbor
observing, thought at first by their Habit, that they might be some Workmen
belonging to Mr. Harris; but taking notice that neither he nor his Brother that
dwelt with him appeared, when they saw the Prisoners come the second time,
began to have a Suspicion of them; though one of the Thieves perceiving himself
seen, knocked a little at the Door before he entered, to color the business;
however the Witness, like an honest Man and good Neigbour, went to Mr. Harris's
house, and calling them up, enquired whether they had employed any persons to
remove any Stuffs that Morning; and being answered in the Negative, and some of
his Family immediately coming forth to look after the Thieves, upon enquiry
after such persons so loaded, found they passed through Ducklane, and that they
were seen to go into an Alehouse with their Bundles, near Clothfair-gate.
Whereupon knocking there, the Victualler himself after some time came to the
Door, but stoutly denied that any such people had come into his house, or were
there; but the Constable (whom by that time the Prosecutor had procured) told
him, he must needs search his house; and doing so, soon found the several
Bundles of Stuffs, but could not so readily discover the Thieves, for the house
was contrived with notable private holes, proper for Concealments. So a Workman
was called to assist to find out any such secret places, and in one of them
they met with a whole bundle of Perriwigs, and Cases of Barbers Instruments; at
last they happend'd into a small dark Room, where one of the Prisoners John
Moor was in Bed, and pretending to be fast asleep: yet they observed the
Bed-cloaths very smooth, as if he were but just laid down; and turning off the
Clothes, they found he had still one stocking on. And looking under the Bed,
they espied his Companion, who had hid himself there, and being dragged out was
very unruly, fighting with all that came near him, till he was mastered; and in
his Mouth he had two Guinnies and some Silver that he had stolen out of the Till
of Mr. Harris's Counter: And likewise there was taken on him some brass
Half-Crowns, that had lain by for several years. Being carried before Sir
William Turner, they behaved themselves very insolently, and upon notorious
Evidence of the Fact were Committed to Newgate: And the business being noised,
what things were found in their Lodging, Mr. Thomson and Mr. Baker, two persons
whose Shops were lately broke open, came to view them; and as to the Perriwigs,
Mr. Thompson swore them to be the same that were stolen from him: and Mr. Baker
owned the three Cases of Instruments. So that now there were three Indictments
against them, on all which they were found Guilty: And on that for Robbing Mr.
Harris, Grains the Alehouse-keeper, where they were taken, was likewise
Indicted with them as an Accessory after to the Felony, and fairly Convicted
for the same; though he made all the Defense that could be, having some
Relations of very good Worth and Reputation: But so much the more is he to be
blamed, for scandalizing his Family with such base practices.

This Moor was formerly Tried for Treason for Coining or Clipping, and Sides
was burnt in the hand but last Sessions; they had lately taken a Lodging in Mr.
Grains house, who alleged that they went out and in that morning the Robbery
was committed without his privity; which was the reason he denied that any such
men were come in there, he not knowing any thing of it, etc.

Mary Clark was Convicted for Murdering her Bastard Child; she was a Lodger in
Rosemary-Lane, and went for a Widow, and was delivered without any notice
taken by the people of the house: but the Infant being accidentally discovered
in the house of Office, there arose some suspicion it might be hers; who upon
Examination at first denied it, but by view of her Breasts, and other
symptoms, it appearing she had lately had a Child, they taxing her more
earnestly, she confessed it, but alleged it was still born; but having no
witness thereof, as the Statute requires, she was found guilty.

Elizabeth Unison was found guilty of Felony, for Robbing her Master of ten or
twelve pounds in Money, part of which she confessed, acknowledging that she
spent five pound in one day, and telling him where twenty shillings more of it
was. An old Thief was Convicted of stealing Pewter out of the House of one Mrs
Cleverton, a widow keeping a Coffee-house in Bell-Savage yard on Ludgate Hill:
four or five of them came in, and called for two Tankards of drink, and took an
opportunity to steal five Dishes, and several Plates out of a small Buttery:
the Lad that tended them not liking their looks and carriage, asked the Maid if
she had lost any thing; who not presently missing the Pewter, replied No: but
having laid down a Groat, and being going away in some confusion, some of the
Plates dropped down in the room, from or very near the now Prisoner; whereupon
the rest fled, and cleverly carried off the five Dishes, this fellow only
being taken, who proves a notorious offender, and very lately was in for other
Rogueries, but escaped; however, the Jury were favorable, finding him only
guilty of Petite Larceny, that is, to the value of ten pence.

William Westwood a Carter, was Tried for killing one Jeremy Normel, a person
of the same profession. There being sevreal Teems together, Normel suddenly
whipped the Horses, and drove them so, as they had like to have hurt a Boy that
belonged to the Prisoner, who was so incensed, that he run and gave Normel a
box on the ear; not that it could be imagined he had any design to kill him,
but so unhappily it happened, that with the Blow he fell down; and the Horses
going on, the wheels, or one of the wheels of the Cart run over his Head, and
shattered it to pieces, so that he never spoke word more. It was proved, that
the Prisoner when he saw him fall so dangerously, endeavored all he could to
pull him away, but could not so suddenly do it as to prevent the mischief, for
which he now appeared much affected with sorrow; nor was there any proof of
former malice between them; so that upon the whole matter he was found guilty
but of Manslaughter.

A young Wench coming with four more of her naughty Companions to a Victualling
House in the Hay-market, went up stairs, and fetched some Victuals from a Cooks,
and made several other sleeveless errands to and fro, to watch and amuse the
people of the House, whilst in the mean time some of the Crew slipped up another
pair of stairs, broke open a Chest of Drawers, and stole eight pound in Money,
several Rings, and other things of value: they went away for the present; but
the people having taken better notice of the Prisoner than of any of the rest,
by reason of her often going in and out, met with her soon after, and now swore
it directly, that she was one of the Company, whereupon she was Convicted of
the Felony.

A young man was questioned for stealing an Horse, being met on the Road upon
one that was stolen some time since; but there came a person now, that justified
he sold the said Horse to the Prisoner; but how he himself came by him, is a
question that must be examined another time; in the mean while the Prisoner was
discharged.

There were several Tried, and some Convicted for petty Felonies, and
especially that common practice of Shop-lifting, and stealing of Tankards out
of Drinking-houses.

But the most remarkable Trial was of two Gentlemen of considerable quality,
viz. Mr. Doughty and Mr. Hambleton, for killing one Philip Caps a Coachman;
touching which a multitude of Witnesses were Examined, and the Circumstances
were too many and various to be here related punctually, but the effect thereof
was as follows; Mr. Doughty having made use of the Deceased's Coach, coming at
last to a person of Qualitie's house in the Pallaceyard, was discharging him,
and so offered him what he thought was reasonable for his Fare; but the
Coachman insisted that it was too little, and would not take it: whereupon
words arose, and the Gentleman beat the Coachman soundly, without drawing his
Sword; during which Bussle Mr. Hambleton came forth of the Person of Qualities
house, and knowing Mr. Doughty well, encouraged him to beat the Coachman, and
advised him to make him down on his knees and ask him forgiveness. Having thus
chastized the Coachman, Mr. Doughty went from him into the Courtyard and shut
the door after him; but the Coachman not yet satisfied, followed, and clapping
his foot to the door, pusht it open: then Mr. Doughty drew his Sword, and gave
him several wounds; one Witness seemed to say, Mr. Hambletons Sword was also
drawn, but the rest did not see any such thing; but 'twas proved, that the poor
man being down, after he had received some wounds, begged very heartily for his
Life that he would not kill him, crying out he was wounded; whereupon Doughty
desisting from his fury, some people took him up, and opening his Doublet,
found abundance of Blood: he had below the left pap a large wound, and as was
supposed deep, being run into the Body; but the Witnesses for the Prisoner
represented it as only superficial, that the Rapier glanced along on the Ribs,
and so made very little penetration; he was likewise wounded in the Thigh, and
on the Nose, and forehead, and a Cut on the hand. Perceiving him in this
desperate condition, Doughty presently caused him to be carried to a Surgeon,
and all the care imaginable to be taken for him, that he should want nothing
necessary for Diet or Cure. The Wounds were given in April, and toward the end
of May, seemed to be wholly healed, Doughty paying the Surgeon, and supplying
the man with Money to support him, who appeared so well, that he went abroad,
and once drove his Coach, but it being a wet day, it was supposed he caught
cold, and thereupon relapsed, and soon after dyed: the Witnesses for the
Prisoner were of opinion that he dyed of a Fever, but there were several
Arguments that swayed the Court and Jury to a contrary belief: for first,
during his last sickness he vomited abundance of Blood, so that it was
probable, though the Wounds were healed up outwardly, yet there was no perfect
Cure wrought within and besides, the man to the last declared, That he must
charge his death on the wounds so received. After several hours Examination of
Witnesses, and consideration of all Circumstances, the Jury acquitted Mr.
Hambleton, and brought in Mr. Doughty guilty of Murder.

Arthur Garland was Convicted for picking the pocket of one Marg. Rumley, and
stealing from her an Hankercheif: he was an old practitioner in that Mystery,
and to aggravate his Crime, no place was so sacred as to deter him from it, for
this fact was done in St. Sepulchers Church, where being known, one that
belonged to the Church watched him, and saw him dive in one man's pocket without
any booty, then he came to this woman, and angled out her Handkerchief, but
being presently taxed, dropped it. The Jury found him guilty, and the value of
the Handkerchief six pence. It was said, that some of the Diving Gang should
declare, That they would go no more to Church, because many of them had had
such ill luck there of late, but henceforth they would haunt the Quakers
Meetings, and nip their bungs without control, because they would not swear,
and if so there was no danger of Conviction.

Two Brokers a man and a woman, were Tried for receiving stolen Goods, but for
want of direct proof escaped. A fellow was found guilty for stealing a parcel
of Tin; and four persons, viz. William Abbot, Ed. Williams, Edward Pritchard,
and Samuel Griffith, were Convicted for stealing a parcel of Damask Curtains, a
silk Quilt, an embroidered Belt, and other Goods to a considerable value; being
seen early in a morning with such bundles about Shooe-lane, by an honest man
that knew some of them, he caused them to be apprehended, and since the Goods
appeared to have been stolen from a person of Honor: but two of the Prisoners
being but Boys and Pupils, as it may be supposed to the other two, they were
found guilty only to the value of of ten pence, the other two of Felony.

John Giles, as one of those that made the late barbarous Attempt upon Justice
Arnold, and who was lately brought up out of the Country where he was taken,
was Arraigned on an Indictment of Misdemeanour for that villainy, but made many
excuses to put off the Trial, as that he had no notice of it, that his
Witnesses were not here, etc. To which Justice Arnold, who was ready with his
Witnesses, answered; That he had as much notice of the time of Trial as
himself; That he had brought up his Witnesses, and so might the said Giles if
he had any; and that the matter was made public enough, notice having been
given that it should now be Tried, in the Gazet; the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor was likewise very urgent not to have it put off any longer, as
apprehending these pretenses and delays to be nothing but the usual shams which
Papists commonly have to shuffle off Justice; but at last, to the end the
Prisoner might not have the least pretense to complain that he was surprised,
the C^urt was pleased to put his Trial off till Wednesday next in the
afternoon, and by that time, if he have any Witnesses, he may bring them even
from St. Omers. Mr. Herbert, formerly in custody concerning the same matter,
and Bailed, was now bound over again, with Sureties to appear the first day of
next Term at the Kings-Bench-Bar, he having since, (as was proved by several
Witnesses) most violently and inhumanely beaten a poor Woman in the Country,
and in his fury gave this worthy reason for it, That she had done his Friend
Giles an injury, or words to that effect, as supposing it seems her concerned
in discovering him. He seemed to resent it hard, that he should be prosecuted
by so mean a person, but was very well answered, That when he should beat women
of greater Quality, he should have better people to prosecute him; in the mean
time, 'twas all the reason in the world that this Woman though never so poo^,
should have right done her.

There were in all Nine persons Condemned to dye, six Men and three Women, viz.
Philip Doughty and Mary Clarke for Murder: Jane Lant for Robbing Jane Davies of
thirteen pound seven shillings and six pence in Money, and Clothes to the value
of thirty pound: Isabel Starling for Robbing her Master of two hundred pound:
Tho. Sides for the Robbery in Bartholomew-close, and other Felonies: Samuel
Griffith an old Offender for a Felony: Joseph Mestn^r, and William Wilson, for
Robbing on the H^gh-way as Foot-pads: and James Carew for a Burghlary in the
House of Richard Bedding his Neighbor, and stealing fifty shillings in money,
the woman's Wedding-Ring, and other goods. Besides these that are to dye, there
were Eight burnt in the Hand, Two that are to be Transported, Ten to be Whipped.

FINIS.

