The New made Colonel Or IRELANDS Juggling Pretended Reliever.

By John Naylier, late Quartermaster to Captain Bray.

JER. 9.5. And they will deceive every one his Neighbor, and will not speak
the Truth: They have taught their Tongues to speak Lies, and weary themselves
to commit Iniquity.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. in the first Year of Englands Declared Freedom, 1649.

The New made COLONEL, OR, IRELANDS Juggling pretended Reliever: IN A Narrative
of the Actions of Mr John Reynolds, in his Practice to overthrow Englands best
Friends.
THE Almighty Creator of the World who has Created all things, and amongst the
rest of things, the Heart of mankind; (which particular part of his Creation,
he has reserved the knowledge of to himself only) puts me upon a Manifestation
of the present sad thoughts of my heart, to all those men of the world, (that
this may concern) for there is in my apprehension, no other way for man to make
his fellow Creatures acquainted with the thoughts of his heart, then verbally
by words expressing himself, or by his Pen to make known to others what he is
inwardly filled withal; therefore finding my self very much pressed in Spirit,
by the unjust dealings of those men, which have pretended to the highest
Principles of Justice; I have thought good to ease my present trouble, by this
course of writing, although but a poor ease to my mind, as in relation to my
satisfaction.

Therefore as a Narrative of the Cause of my present trouble of mind, I shall
here lay down the Cause, as in the presence of God, which shall judge both me
and the Causers thereof.

WHen in the latter end of Forty seven, and in the beginning of Forty eight,
there was such a general Apostasy from Principles of Justice, that we were
almost overrun by those Enemies of the Nation (the Cavaliers) that (those
which had engaged for the Nation, were become the scorn of most men) then I
say, we began to fix our eyes upon those men which had contended highest for
the Nations freedom, that we might engage under such men once again, to try
whether God would prosper us in venturing to bring down those the peoples
professed Enemies; when looking curiously about us, we found out Captain
Reynolds, a man much looked upon by the honest party, for one that had stood
and contended (with suffering) for our Birthright; and then finding that he
was in employment to raise Men and Horses for the Kingdoms Service, as Major to
a Regiment in Kent, under the Command of Sir Michael Levesey, we then I say,
began cheerfully to engage with him, conceiving that God had thrown a great
advantage into our hands: But further, when I my self with many others came to
hear that there was a Commission to be given to Captain William Bray, to
Command a Troop in the aforesaid Regiment; we were most of us filled with
Comfort, that such men, that were so excellently Principled, should now after
their sufferings, come to be trusted with Commands; Whereupon with a great deal
of cheerfulness we engaged with Captain Bray, and although there was never any
such president before, we at our own proper cost did raise a Regiment of Seven
Troops to engage against the Common enemy, when afterward we did engage
several times cheerfully, not looking upon the many breaches of promise which
we found, both from some of those that were highest in our esteem upon the
account of Justice, and others likewise which we less trusted too; but waved.
Capitulating when things of public concernment called for our engagement;
although we had large experience before how many were usually flattered in time
of emergency, and slighted with a Supernumary slighting (when the Rod was from
the back of those Fools that did it) but with cheerfulness we went on, looking
only at the power of God then present amongst us to Conquer; and did, although
blame worthy for so doing, Acquiesce in those men whom we confided in to be of
our and the honest parties Principles: But now behold the Mapp of our misery
drawing up, for when the great and our good God had prospered us with Victory
for all our last Summers Service, and that we had served them faithfully all
the Summer through; now began the enemies of our and the Kingdoms peace to work
their wits how they should bring us into ignominy, which they first contrived
by infusing into the Committee, that some of us, especially Captain Bray's
Troop, were Levellers, and men that were of dangerous Principles to the quiet
of the Nation; whereupon they presently bethink themselves of shutting their
hands of us first, with another Troop which had a great many men of honest
Principles in it, (although led by an acquiessing Captain) now we that had no
sinister intents in us, but were merely upon the account of Justice to the
Nation, did quietly march away out of Kent, to be led like sheep to the
slaughter, or that which is worse, to be the tools or instruments to make one
ambitious man great, that formerly had pretended nothing as his Interest but
Salus populi suprema Lex, and all the Principles of Justice that can be thought
upon; I say, then at our dismission from the County of Kents Service, it was
pretended to us by our Major Reynolds, that we should march into Hartfordshire
there to quarter until we saw what became of the Treaty then with the King in
the Isle of Wight, which we thought would be over within a matter of three
weeks; when that being ended, we should either not need to stand at all, in
respect of the present and speedy execution of justice; or if there were need,
we should stand upon the same account with the rest of the Army under the Lord
Fairfax: But having waited the aforesaid time and longer, we then received an
Order from the Major, to march toward Pontefract, and to take Peterborough in
the way, there to make an Hault until the Major should come up to us; which
Command we obeyed, moving to and fro, because we would not be more burdensome
to the Country then needs must; But alas, all this while we were mistaken,
for he (who we thought would have proved so faithful to us, and in us to the
Commonwealth) was a juggling, by entertaining a motion from the Committee of
Darbyhouse to transport us for Ireland, as if we had stood upon a Mercenary
account, to have engaged upon any Design that might make him a Colonel, or
yield us money; (and to the end that we should juggle as well as he, he sent us
down an Order that we should propound Irish terms to the Troops, and with such
as would entertain the said terms, to march to Southam in Warwickshire in order
to a further march toward Ireland) but when we saw his Order, we did so far
abominate his juggling design, that we never so much as propounded it,
although it had been easy to have persuaded some of his Creatures with us in
high Command to have done it.

But when the upshot came, that the Soldiery could no longer acquiesce, but
that they would by the Consent of Captain Bray, who alone stood with them
(without any Captain in the Regiment) I say, when they would no longer rest to
burden the Country with Free quarter, without knowing what ground it was upon;
they chose them men as Agents to meet, and to consider about it, when in all
the several meetings they found still an opposition in his Creature Captains.
to any other thing then an acquiessing in what the said Major Reynolds could
do; by which means we most basely deceived the expectation of all our honest
friends, who expected that we would not be the last that should declare for the
peoples Rights, knowing our former approved forwardness; but by the means of
such men of the highest places amongst us, we were forced to a silence in
standing for, or declaring for the Peoples Rights, until we were anticipated
by the Armies general Remonstrance, and so justly judged by our honest friends
for men of low and cowardly spirits, and so lost our selves in the account of
honest men, that I fear many of them give us up for final Apostates, although
they have no reason, save our being overruled, by the flattering villainy of
Reynolds, to judge so of us.

But at the last it came to this, That through the mighty importunity of those
that were Friends to our Old Principles, viz. Justice; we at last got an
Address concluded upon, to be delivered to the Lord Fairfax: And the three
Troops then under Reynolds, upon the Account of Justice, did choose them out men
as Agents, to deliver the aforesaid Address: For mark, then we had no Mercenary
Troops amongst us, but we were entangled with Mercenary Apostate Officers of
Reynolds his own Creatures, that made all our endeavors (as to public
concernment) void and frustrate for a great while together: But at last we had
gotten an Address consented to, that might render us to stand upon the pure
account of Justice: which time I my self with others were appointed to come to
London with the aforesaid Address; when coming toward Windsor, we found a great
part of the Army by Order that day to Rendezvous upon Hounsloe-Heath in order
to their march into London; but that night the Armies Headquarters being kept
at Hamersmith, we staid there to speak with Major Reynolds, to hear what
satisfaction he would give us for our being led up and down the Land, upon what
account we knew not as in relation to his intentions, because as I have said
before, we stood merely upon the account of Justice to this Nation, and he was
bargaining to sell us to the Committee of Darby-house for Four pounds a man and
Horse, and complete Arms, for the Service of Ireland; (for so his own Order
sent down to us to propound to the men specifies in words:) But he made Answer
again, That he thought that we had more wit then so to think that he had any
intent for Ireland, but merely was using his wits to keep honest men together
for the good of the Nations Interest: But then I asked him, Why he cold
Livetenant Spilman, a honest man, That his intentions was really for Ireland
according to his pretenses? He made me Answer again, That he had given private
intimations to all the Officers of the Troops, That he never intended any such
thing as a Commanding of men into Ireland; but that he, what he was then doing,
was merely to hold Correspondency with Darby-house Committee for a time, until
he should have opportunity to provide for honest men: The belief of which, he
the easier fastened upon us, because we reflected upon his former Contendings
for the Nations just Rights, but the sequel will show both the Levity of our
over Credulity, and the wickedness of his Apostasy; for the very next morning,
viz. the same morning that the Army marched into the City, he came to a house
in Hamersmith where Capt. Bray, my self, and others quartered that night; I say
he came to us by four of the Clock in the morning, and told us, That now he had
got Orders for our Receiving into the Army, and that he had then an Order for
one of us to March away to the Troops, to Command them to March out of
Oxfordshire where they then were, to march into Hampshire in Order to the safe
guarding of the King then being in Hurst Castle; which Order, together with His
violence against those he had jugled with, viz. The Committee of Darby-house,
that he said at Hamersmith, That he hoped to have his Bond of Six thousand
pounds from them before night, which was that morning the Army marched into
London, or else he hoped to cut the throats of some of that Committee, etc.
the employment designed to us, begot in us a respective belief of his
integrity to his former principles, and an acquiescency in his future Care for
us. But when we had staid in Hampshire, being sometime upon the particular
Gaurd of the King, I say, when we had staid a great while there, both until,
and after the King was fetched away, without any Care taken for pay for us, that
so we might, as the rest of the Army did, pay our quarters, and not be so
burdensome to the Country; we at last were written to by Reynolds, That he had
Established Six Troops into the Army, which he pretended still was his greatest
Care to provide for honest men, so as to keep them together.

But yet his great promises, compared with his slight performances, wrought a
continual suspicion again in the Troops, that he was rather a Juggler then a
real Friend to the Nation.

Yet notwithstanding, upon his further Order we marched into Worcestershire,
where by the way, we met with two other Troops, that had been upon his Juggle
of the Four pounds a man for Ireland; and there, what with the men's hatred and
detestation of his double dealing, and the oppression of the Country, together
with their own poverty, they had reduced one of the aforesaid Troops to a very
small Company of men, and their Troop made up again of such as they could get,
of any principles whatsoever; and these men we were fain to join withal, and
they to have the Command in Chief over us in Worcestershire, which made us not
to suspect without cause, that we should meet with such dealings as indeed now
we have found.

For after we had lain upon the Country without provision of pay made for us a
great while, to the peoples sad oppression, we began again to stir, to Petition
the House of Commons, being the more induced thereunto by Captain Bray's being
snatched from us without any thing laid to his Charge; which actions we had
many reasons to believe was by a strong influence of Reynolds upon those that
put another in his Command.

But when it was endeavored all that possible could be, to draw the whole
Regiment to a Conjunction in the aforesaid Petition, we found so many
acquiessing Officers and Soldiers, to stand against it, that Captain Bray's
own Troop were fain to do it singly of themselves; and they were so sensible of
their being abused by Reynolds his juggling, that it produced this succeeding
Letter to be sent to him, in the name, and with the Subscriptions of Captain
Bray's Troop.

Sir,
WE little thought that the Product of our Patience would have begot so
desperate an intrenchment upon Ours and the Peoples just Rights, as that now
our great and unwearied pains, hardships, losses, and costs, should bring forth
nothing but the only things that we have endeavored and fought against, viz.
Iniquity, Injustice, and all the concomitants of wickedness, which we see wrapped
up in your dealings with us. Have we been more unfaithful than the other Troops
to the Nation? Have we ventured our Lives under your Command less then they?
Have our Principles swarved from the Foundation of a just Being more then they?
Remember that there is a just God that sees your heart and ours, in the
remembrance of which, it must needs be horror enough to your Conscience without
naming particulars; but yet we must name some for the manifestation of Truth:
Have not you cost us (we mean this Troop) near upon a Thousand pounds amongst
us in Charges, to wait for the good which we expected from your former
professed Principles? but now all the use that we see you have made of all our
Charge and Patience, and what ever else, is now at last, but to make your self
a Colonel out of the sad ruins of the Nations and our Rights and Estates: Nay,
would you but yet rest passive, it might give us some ease of mind; but you are
so active, that we have just cause to suspect that you have had an influence
upon a Captain in the Regiment, to propound to us, That now at last we should
be thrown from the Colors, all except Forty or Fifty, without righteous and
just satisfaction, after our 25 weeks patience, without one penny of Pay, and
then the Troop to be made up again of such as you shall bring or send down, to
reap the fruit of all our Labors. But we give you to understand in time, That
we carry not such ignoble Spirits about us, whatever you may judge of our
silence hitherto, as to admit any other Captain to Command us, be he what he
can be, until you have either proved Captain Bray Treacherous in his Trust, or
Deficient in the Charge he has upon him; for we wear our Swords to vindicate
the Nation from injustice, and shall we be first begun withal, to have such
unparralleld mischief thrown upon us? No, we are resolved rather to expire in
our Being, before we will prostitute our Consciences to any Tyrant or Usurpers
will; we will fly to the Law of Nature and Reason first, and therefore we
thought good in time to let you know our Resolutions, that you might not
flatter your self in things that you can never accomplish, no nor the greatest
power on Earth; for whatever you may think of us, we have yet our veins full of
English blood, although we have so long stood still to the admiration of all
honest men.

Will. Hashup, Lievt. Chr. Chesman, Corn. Ioh. Naylier, Quart. Aust. Whitny,
Corp. Rob. Harbison, Corp. Ioh. Bastin, Joseph Pepit., John Marshall, Edw.
Bastin, Will. Scott. Sam. Ganer, Sam. Howlt. Fran. Lee, Dan. King, Tho.
Satchel, Ioh. Wright, Rob. Painter. Fra. Haslelup, Will. Bastin, Ioh. Lathe,
Tho. Grimes. Ioh. Hardey, Gilb. Games, Rich. Hill, R. Sanders, R. Harrison, T.
Richards, V. Stephenson, Ed. Avery, Hen. Bugbey, T. Robbinson, Rich. Robbins,
George Betten, G. Spooner, T. Anderton, Ioh. Franson, Ioh. Allin, Rob. Abbitt,
Will. Blithe, Chry. Booth, Iam. Trigg, Will. Smith, Hum. Budds, R. Patridge, S.
Mowbray, Will. Howel, Ioh. Parr, Ioh. Lasey, I, Rustal, Tho. Linnel, Tho.
Flafer, I. Washburne, I. Cornelius, Dav. Chentin, Will. Sidwel, Tho. Roe, R.
Ellegood, N Westwood, Han. Dawson, Ier. Stephenson, H. Philpot, Ed. Tailor,
Will. Haddock Rob. Bence, Will. Gilbert. I. Ellington, At. Boothe, Will.
Morden, Ioh. Mutlow, Rob. Bulgey, Ioh. Price, Ralph Phillips, Ioh. Elvins, Ioh.
Burges.



THis Letter being Subscribed by Captain Brays Troop, whose names are
Subscribed; but when I came to London with others that the Troop entrusted, we
were persuaded by our Friends not to Print this Letter to the public veiw of
the world, because they did suppose Reynolds was not yet an absolute Apostate:
But at my going down again to my Colors, I found enough of him to conclude him
an Apostate.

For, in the time that we were at London, there came down a Lieutenant,
pretending himself to be in Commission under one Airs, who told Captain Brays
men, That the said Airs was to have that Troop: which men being startied, and
wondering that Captain Bray should be taken from them without first showing them
a Reason; and besides that, they were Commanded to deliver up their Colors to
a man they never saw, and he not there then neither: The said Troop were
Resolved to maintain their Colors like Soldiers, and not to be affronted as
they were Commoners, but to deny the Surrender of their Colors until they were
satisfied in the aforesaid premises: Whereupon they marched presently away to
another Division of the Regiment then being in Shropshire, under the Command of
one Captain Chaplain, whom they solicited to stand for them in the obtaining of
Justice; but the best entertainment they found from the said Chaplain was, That
he denied to give them any Order for Quarter; and more then that, he forwarned
the Country to give them any Quarter; so that instead of protecting them until
Justice were done upon them, he enforced them to Resolve to lie in a Field near
Welch-Felton in Shropshire, until the people of the Town came courteously out
to them, and invited them into their houses, and gave them Quarters in their
own Charity; telling them, That they wondered to see such Soldiers as they
were, that were so patient in their abuses.

But now Reynolds the new-made Colonel, that he might get them again into his
clutches, made fair weather to certain of the Troop that went to him, and sent
an Order to them that they should come back to a Regiment Rendezvous which he
had appointed to be at Keynton in Warwickshire, defiring them that they would
be sure to be all at the said Meeting, that so he might see all his honest Pree
Commoners, (for that was his own expression) by which we thought he would have
proved loving to us according to his former professed Principles, which we were
the rather induced to believe, because he gave us an Order under his own hand,
for quartering near the Regiment, promising us, That he would protect us from
any harm that any body should offer to us: Moreover, telling us, That if any
Order should come to him, (or to any other that he could heat of) he would be
sure to give us notice of it; (which were apparent signs to us, that his hea^^^
^s upright toward us,) but now mark what fell from him at the said Rendezvous,
he there gave us leave to propound our Greivances, which for order sake we did
by the mouth of two Soldiers chosen out by general Consent, where we
desired, That according to the Generals Order, the Troop as it stood, entire
under Captain Bray, might be delivered into the hands of the new Captain
Airs. with our own Colors, which he granted to us; But while we were
making our Muster-Rovvls to that purpose, he and the new Captain had so
jugled, that he fell from that Order of his own again, and Mustered a new
Troop of men that had been many of them in Pay in other places, while we
served six Months without one penny of Pay; and so these new men come now to
reap the fruits of our Labors. And I am informed, That he has sent up word,
That his Regiment has unanimously engaged for Ireland: You may judge, for he
propounded such Terms to his own Troop, desiring them to signify their
forwardness by holding up their Hats or their Hands; but I could not see one
man hold up either Hatt or Hand but himself and some Officers that follovved
him about the Field; at length he Commanded his Colors to march out, and those
that excepted of Irish terms to follovv the Colors, and then indeed there was
one man of his own Troop that did dravv out after his Colors upon that
account. Now you may see what it is for a Troop or Regiment to be unanimous
in his Sense; and for the Majors Troop, they were so unanimous, that he was
fain to dravv out a Party of Captain Airs his new men to Guard their Colors;
for he has so discontented the Regiment by taking away most of the chiefest
Principled men that were their Officers, that I can see but fevv of the oldest
Soldiers of the Regiment that do not conclude him an Apostatized Knave: And
for my own part, being with him at Banbury, the last time I saw him, Charging
him with a thing that he had promised but the day before, and he told me
himself, That his Promises were sealed with Butter; which indeed I found by
woeful experience.

Now Reader do but judge what hope (...) have of good from such men in Chief
Command, that make no more of their word, then to profess openly, That they are
not bound by their word. They talk much of Jesuits, and strange nicknames
else that they have for men of honest Principles, but judge whether this do not
resemble ( Garnett by name) a professed Jesuit, who being told. That King James
would find out Papists by His Oath of Allegiance being imposed upon them:
Garnett made Answer again, That King James should know, That the Oath of
Allegiance was subject to a Paper Dispensation. Thus have I Desciphered to
thee, the Apostasy of this man, merely to that end, That other honest men may
not for the future, be liable to be deceived by him, as I, and many other
honest men have been.

FINIS.

