THis coming to my hand, and reading it over, savouring it to come from a pure
Fountain, eternal life springing forth it self, in and by that spirit which
sets free the Prisoner of Hope, and brings to reign over all Dominions and
Spirits, and though the earthen vessel be under bonds, yet does the Spirit of
Life flow forth to its own in all; and having its witness in me, finding the
same spirit sealing to it, a necessity was laid upon me to put it in print,
that so it might do it service, and have unity with its own.

S. B.

How sin is strengthened, and how it is overcome.
THat Sin is in the world, and that all are thereby become children of wrath,
is generally believed and confessed by all; but how sin is strengthened in men
and women against God and their own souls, or how it is overcome, few there be
that have learned or mind to know; yet for their sakes that does, I do here
declare somewhat of that which I have received from him, who is faithful and
true in all his testimony.

And this I find, that as sin got rooting at first through lust, so till this
day it has its strength, by the desires going forth to affect or lust after
something whether spiritual, or carnal, above, before, or besides what that
eternal spirit by which man was created, does communicate to him, or beget in
him; for the eye of the Lilly being blinded by the god of this world, which eye
should look unto God for all; there is an eye of unbelief open, which looks
into the visibles, and gives occasion for the lust to conceive in the mind,
affections and desires, after something which the spirit of God leads not to,
for the obtaining whereof all the power and wisdom that is in man is set on
work, and this becomes sin both in the desires and actions, and the more it is
followed, the stronger it is; for what ever is hereby obtained, becomes a
treasure of wickedness, laid up in the habitation of the wicked one, whereby
the lust is ^^creased, and the seed of God burdened and buried, whereby the
creature becomes daily more unsensible of the will of God, and the movings of
that pure spirit which should keep the creature alive to the Creator, and draw
the mind wholly up to the Father, on him alone to wait for a supply in all
things, both for soul and body: And every desire that springs from this root
being suffered to go forth, defiles the man, and brings in that which
oppresses the Just, until by continuance man grow into the nature of the
enmity, and the imaginations of the heart be wholly evil, and that which should
give the knowledge of God wholly buried, and in many that which should give the
knowledge of sin also, whereby man becomes past feeling, utterly dead in sins
and trespasses heaped upon the just against the day of judgment, which becomes
by custom as natural to commit as to the Ox to drink water; yea with
greediness does man in this condition hunt after his own destruction, having
damned up the way of life in himself by often transgressing it, and is become
degenerate from the nature of God, having received in, and willingly joined to
that nature of Satan, which as a leaven has and does work into its own nature
all that receive it, or yield unto it, whom as they grow therein, there springs
up fruits of the same root and nature which they bring forth in his time and
opportunity with liking and delight, being furnished with all subtilty to
color them over, and plead for them, being in covenant and agreement with sin,
some in one thing, and some in another, every one pleading the allowance of
that sin with God which most suits their lusts, pride, profit or pleasure,
credit or esteem in the world, or some self-end, and at these they take
counsel, and not at the spirit of the Lord, which is sin, and which is no sin,
but none will believe that they can be set free from all sin by him who
testifies against all sin in spirit; and in all this the man of sin has his
kingdom by consent, for they being willing to keep covenant with him in one
evil, are guilty of all.

Now the way to overcome all this, and him that has his power therein, is by
faith in Christ Jesus the light, and life, and way to the Father; for without
believing there can be no victory; but in the faithful following of him, and
patient bearing his cross, and enduring his sufferings, comes the enmity to be
slain, captivity led captive, and man set at liberty in the holy seed, to serve
the Father in spirit and life again.

And first, Christ as he is the light of the world must be believed, for so he
comes to manifest and reprove the deeds of darkness, and to make a separation
between the works of God, and the works of the devil, in the mind and spirit of
the creature, and to let them see what spirit does exercise their minds and
affections, and the fruits of each spirit, and the moving and working of each
spirit severally, without which none can rightly know what is to be destroyed,
and what saved: what to join to, and what to war against: for by this light
alone comes man to the knowledge of sin in himself, in the ground and root of
it, and every motion threof: for though the letter or something without, may
show what is sin by its fruits when it is brought forth, yet its the work of
the spirit to discover spiritual wickedness in its first motion, which is the
only place to kill it ere it become sin; and this light must be believed, and
diligently minded all-along, for such is the subtilty of the enemy, having got
power over the will and senses of man, that he will set them to war against the
creature, and destroy the Creation rather then that of his which defiles the
creature, and this cannot be avoided any other way but by minding the light of
Christ, to separate that which is but to be cleansed, from that which is to be
destroyed, and this man cannot do without the spirit, being a spiritual work,
though he never so much seeks after it: And here is the cause why many are kept
at hard labor all their time, and never come clear out of sin and
uncleanness, even not believing in that which has the power to separate and
lead out of the evil, but without the single eye are at work in the dark, and
sees not a clear separation in the body: And hence it is that some destroy
themselves in seeking to destroy sin, not minding the light of the Savior, is
led by the destroyer, fighting against that which Christ comes to save, whilst
he that comes to destroy lies hid in the dark: But he that believes in that
which manifests all things, reproves all things, and judges all things, with
that eye shall be led what to war against, and what to join with all-along in
the work, for he alone is the covenant of light, and given for a leader, which
whosoever believes and follows, shall not err in judgment or practice, but
unbelief therein is the cause why there are so many blind guides, and many
people dye in their sins.

And thus he is the way of God, and is to be believed in, (to wit) as he
manifests the works of the Devil apart from the works of God, condemning the
one in the flesh, and justifying the other in the spirit; and as he manifests
every spirit with its workings, motions, and ends, their ground and offspring,
whence they come, and whither they return, that thereby the creature may know
who it is that exercises his mind and members, and to what spirit he yields
himself in his obedience and service, and so may come to know the use and end
of all his works, what to choose, and what to refuse; what to justify, and what
to condem in its first motion, before it be brought forth or formed in the
womb, that judgment may be kept on the head of transgression, and liberty
proclaimed to the Just: and for want of faith and feeling of this way of Christ
it is that so many perish in sin, and yet seem to strive against sin, even
because they cannot believe that to be sufficient to save from sin which
manifests sin in the ground, and condemns it in its first motion, which if they
did but in faith join with him to condemn sin in the ground, temptation, and
motion, it would dye, and wither, and not be able long to live or prevail; and
if it for a time should prevail in the members, yet not to condemnation; for I
have found a great difference between sin condemned in the creature (though not
yet wholly dead) and sin lived in, and pleaded for; for if thy life and
judgment be in that alone which condemns sin, then art thou dead to sin, and
alive to Christ, and it is no more thou that sins, but sin that yet remains in
thee, to which thou art dead, to which thou do not consent, like, nor approve
of, nor any way add any strength thereto; but thy faith and love, delight and
strength is in him, which condemns it; he that truly is in this faith and love,
by the working thereof shall all his eenmies perish, and by that faith and love
shall the just live in that creature, and he in him condemning and killing sin
till it all be done away, and the creature of God found alive in him alone, who
without spot will present him to the Father; for this I have found, that, that
which manifests sin in its first motion, judges it there, and condemns it
there, has the only power to kill sin ere it be committed, and so has only
power to save from condemnation; for this you shall find, that as Christ does
not live to justification, where he is not believed and justified, loved,
followed, and confessed, so sin does not live to condemnation where it is
hated, condemned, and denied; for where that spirit of wickedness is seen in
the light, and separated from, and judged apart from the creature, the creature
joining in judgment with the just, there sin will wither, and Satan flee, for
there he has no kingdom, nor a hiding Habitation; for the light being minded,
and judgment having free passage and consent, it searches out his hidden
things, and judgment passes upon all his deceit, root and ground, with his
fruits; so is the strong man spoiled, and his stuff, by faith in Christ, and
not by strength of the creature, by believing the just, and denying the unjust.

For according to every man's faith, so shall he receive from God; now he that
believes salvation, and that cleaves to, and lives in some sin, and pleads for
it, and believes he must do so, his faith stands in an unclean thing, and an
unclean thing will live by that faith, and be justified by that creature, and
in his justifying any thing that is unclean, therein is the just condemned; and
the just being condemned which should give dominion over the unclean, the wild
Plant has its liberty to grow until it overspread the Plant of God, and cover
the man, wholly stop the ear, and blind the eye, and hardens the heart against
every motion to good, or check for evil; and let not this man look for good
fruit, but after his faith who so believes.

Also, on the contrary, He that feels a strife in himself between the clean and
the unclean, and sees the one reprove for sin, and the other plead for sin, and
believes in that which is pure, clean and just, which condemns the unjust and
unclean, that faith stands in that which is pure, and the mystery of it is
held in a pure conscience; and that pure faith being followed, will purify the
heart, and cleanse the hands from unjust actions; and by that faith the just
lives, and grows, and springs, and brings forth, and the pure plant spreads and
covers the earth with the knowledge of God, his holiness and purity, and all
grace in the heart, which becomes as a workingleaven, till it has wrought out
the unclean nature, and conformed the whole man to himself: And this is a work
of the holy faith, which none can receive but who believes in holiness; for
none can bring clean fruit out of an unclean faith.

And this further, for the encouragement of such as honestly indeed would be
rid of their sin, and set free to serve God in holiness without deceit, thou
feeling in thee the moving of that which is holy, bearing witness against that
which is contrary to holiness, and condemning it, and thee for joining with it
in all thy conversation: I say, in that believe, for that is all thou knows of
Christ in thee, and believing and following it, thou will feel it making a
separation in thy inward man, betwixt that which Christ comes to save, and that
which he comes to destroy; for this is he that comes from above to set before
thee life and death divided, that thou joining to the life, and believing, may
be saved from death; and as thou art faithful to this spirit which condemns sin
in the flesh, so thou will feel warring against, and working out sin daily, to
which if thou clearly join, denying that which it condemns, then art thou one
spirit with him in his work, and art no longer in the flesh, nor to be
condemned with that sin remaining in the flesh, but art one in him that
condemns sin and self in sinning till sin become exceeding sinful in thy eyes,
as it is in the eyes of God; and as thou grows in love and liking with that
pure spirit, its law and leadings, so thou will become dead to the law of sin,
and it will lose its power in thee, not being minded, loved and served, thy
mind, love and fear being exercised in that which condemns it, and here that
faith that works by love takes the victory, and not thy striving in thy own
strength only from a sight of sin by the Law, for by the works of the Law thou
can not be justified, but by the working of says in Christ Jesus that
spirit; and as thou feel his working in thee, and thou one with him therein, in
his work thou art justified, and by beholding of him in this faith thou will be
changed into his likeness and power by his mighty working in thee, even by
that spirit to which thou art turned; and as he grows in thee, and thou in him,
thou will feel that power arising which will make thee able to answer a good
conscience, and give lasting peace, and so by his resurrection shall be saved
from condemnation, from which thy own works will not save thee, and this work
will go on with joy if thy heart be honest; for seeing him that is holy set
before thee condemning sin, and his holiness and beauty in all his motions does
so delight the honest heart, to see such a glory and beauty near thee, that it
makes the way easy after him for the joy that is set before thee for in all
thy tribulations, trials, and temptations, this faith will present him before
thee; and this made the Saints of old endure the cross, and despise the shame,
and bear the reproach after him joyfully, following the Lamb in all his
leadings.

So thou that loves holiness, it is near thee, power over sin and Satan is
near thee, salvation is at hand; go not forth to seek that abroad which thou
have lost in thy own House; he is thy salvation that condemns sin in thy bosom:
he that reproves the wicked is with thee: he that is pure is thy peace: he that
never consented to sin, but stands a witness against it, if thou have such a
spirit in thee, thou have the spirit of Christ the Savior: So take heed unto
him, to believe him, and to mind his leading, and to follow him, if thou part
not from him he will be thy everlasting peace and overruling power to subdue
thy sins; and by him shall thou tread down strength with ease and delight, and
shall be able to say with such as was come to the same spirit, Greater is he
that is in thee, then he that is in the world; and only that faith that sees
him has power to overcome the world, for he that beholds his glory, treads the
worlds glory under his feet; for whatsoever is seen in him does so far exceed
all other things, that it takes the mind out of all other delights, and leaves
them empty; so that things in Heaven, and things in Earth, Principalities nor
Powers are able to separate from the love of him, how much more will thou leave
thy delight in sin, when thou comes to delight in him! his love will constrain
thee, who loves purely, and has found it, for this is joy indeed, and love
unspeakable, when the soul finds that treasure in his own House freely given,
which he has long been seeking abroad and could never purchase neither with
life nor estate: And the more thou beholdest him, the more will his glory and
love appear, for as thou in the light beholdest the pure motion of this Holy
One, thou will come to see what thou art without him, and what thy wants is,
without which thou can not be happy, and that thou can not have a lasting
peace till with his virtue thou be filled, and with his glory covered, and with
his power armed against every temptation, all which he will make thee heir of
with him, as thou minds to be faithful, and hearken to his movings to obey them
in all things, who thereby will lead thee his way by which he obtained all this
glory and power, and this inheritance from the Father; in which way thou will
find a cross to all thy own ways, and to the worlds spirit in all things,
which will be easy if thou keep thy eye single to him who is set before thee
therein, his glory, and the gaining thereof; but if thou look back into the
world, thou look into temptation without him, and there the spirit of the
world presents thee with loss, and not with gain, setting before thee what thou
must forgo, with all the hard ships and impossibilities that may be, but no
power to bear it, but keeping thy eye to him, thou have always power and peace
before thee in thy way, the hope thereof will be as an Anchor, and the faith a
shield, and the love will give thee life to undergo all the trials for his
sake, bearing his cross daily, which must part thee and thy sins, and crucify
the worldly spirit with the lust thereof, and kill all that wars against thy
soul, and keeps thee from thy inheritance; wherefore it is called, The great
power of God unto salvation.

And as thou becomes faithful thereto, thou will feel the fruit of that Holy
One springing in thee, moving to be brought forth in thee toward God and man,
thy faith will grow, and prayers with strong cries to the Father; as the spirit
sees thy wants, thy love will spring and move in thee, and bring forth toward
God and man upon all occasions, which if thou willingly serve in its smallest
motion, it will increase, but if thou quench it in its movings, and refuse to
bring it forth, it will wither and dry in the not being exercised.

And it is the like of gentleness, meekness, patience, and all other virtues
which are of a springing and spreading nature, where they are not quenched, but
suffered to come forth to his praise in his will and time, who is the begetter
thereof, and to the comfort of his own seed, and cross to the world: And if
thou be faithful daily to offer up the body as a sacrifice, to bring forth his
Image, Name, and Power before his Enemies, then what he moves thee to bring
forth shall be thy inheritance, and will daily increase with using; but if
thou will not give up for his Name sake, but would hold the treasure, and
escape the reproach, then will it be taken from thee, and given to him who will
yield the Lord of the Vinyard his fruit in due season; for that which the
Father freely begets, he will have freely brought forth, that the shining
thereof in the dark world may praise him; what a glory it is to see peace shine
in the midst of war, love in the midst of hatred, meekness in the midst of
strife, righteous judgment in the midst of wickedness, innocence in the midst
of violence, and oppression, as a Lilly amongst thorns, so is that of God
amongst the men of the world; and therein does his nature and beauty appear in
his Temple, to which all must confess, and praise him therein: This is the
glorious day which many have talked on, and those only are the children of it
in whom the brightness shines forth; that which God begets in thee is his Son,
confess him in the midst of his Enemies, and thereby is the Father glorified;
and his Son crowned: but if thou denyest him thy body to testify against the
world, he will deny thee his life to redeem thee from the evil of it: the
breaking forth of the Sun is the beginning of the good day, when that which so
long has condemned thee for sin, comes to shine forth freely in acts of
righteousness, then shall thy darkness be turned into light, thy condemnation
into peace, thy sorrow for sin, to rejoice in holiness: and this will be a good
day to thee, even the day of the Lords righteousness and redemption to thy
soul, and a witness to all men of the appearance of the just one, which
testimony whosoever refuses to bear, all his Religion will prove in vain, and
consists in words without power.

There is a way in which the barren becomes fruitful, and a little is more
serviceable to God then he that has great Riches for himself; you that sees
your wants are nigh it, and the lowly mind will soonest follow it; and for the
honest hearted it is prepared, who seeks to serve God, and not your selves. If
you take heed to your own ways, and make nothing in your minds, you must not
create that which must stand before God, for he will be served with his own
begettings in you. Take heed therefore you make nothing to your selves, nor
murder that which he freely begets; but let your minds be always heavenly,
waiting with patience in that which lets you see your wants, therewith that
your hearts may be open always upward toward God the father of every good
gift; and you being hid in the Heavenly mind from the nature which compasses
the Earth in its comprehensions, and would compass Heaven also, and waiting in
a cross to that mind, as you come into the patient stilness, you must feel the
begettings of the Father moving in you to be brought forth, to which you must
become servants, setting aside all subtilty, and that which is hasty, and what
ever is your own, or has an end to your selves, and in the pure mind behold
what way this moves its appearance against the worldly spirit, that with your
whole hearts and might you may bring it forth in its own image, without
reasoning or consulting with any thing of your own, or any thing of this world,
for this arises in a contrary nature to that which is one with the world, bears
another image and fruit, and has another glory in its appearance, in which the
Father alone is glorified, even in this his Son of his own free begetting; and
herein is the Father glorified, that he be brought forth with his fruits into
the world, who thereby is known how far he is above and contrary to the worldly
spirit, both in the ground, root, and offspring.

And whosoever will give up themselves to serve him herein by his increase,
shall become rich toward God, and increase in strength daily against the
world; and by bringing forth, and by his beauty in holiness, shall become
glorious and beloved in the sight of the Father, whose image and begetting they
bear, wherein they shall become Heirs of the eternal glory.

But if you look into the earthly mind, there the worldly spirit meets you with
his counsel, and consulting and reasoning therewith, you take counsel in the
night, from which the counsel of God is hid, his work, the end and glory
thereof, and instead of that you will be presented with the pleasure, and glory
of this world, which stands in visible things, and is pleasing to the visible
eye and senses, which glory the god of this world sees into, and leads into, in
which his wisdom and knowledge stands, which cannot enter into the invisible
glory and treasure: And in this spirit that knows not God, nor his works, nor
seeks his glory, will you meet with the thief and murderer, sons of darkness,
who will persuade you strongly to murder the pure motion, and not to bring it
forth, or else so to bring it forth as that the image thereof may be so marred,
as not to bear its clear and perfect testimony against the worlds Kingdom,
Power and Glory, and this you cannot avoid if you look back into his counsel,
and counsel with your own reasonings, wherein arises thoughts, cares and
pleasures out of the world, which cumbers the mind, checks the seed, and kills
the holy child, and covers the Pearl with earthly affections and lusts, which
continually hardens the heart, and strengthens the will against the innocent,
and so puts the just to death in the womb, for want of bringing forth in its
time, and according to its motion, which when you have rejected, you cannot
beget again of your selves, nor in your own wills, though you may procure the
like from another spirit in that nature which resists the truth, and corrupts
the mind, and brings forth in its own will, as some have done, who having
disobeyed the still motion of the meek spirit, and looking for high things God
has given them up to a lofty spirit, and strong workings in a contrary nature,
who now have a power wherewith to resist that which first begot you out of the
world, and a moving spirit which draws toward the world again, which being got
into the place of God, (as God) makes them believe that their return is of the
same spirit that called them out, to which they yielding the same obedience,
thenceforth without fear becomes the same they was, if not seven sold worse,
without all hope of recovery: and this disobedience becomes as witchcraft.

Wherefore in the fear of God, watch with all diligence, hearken in the
simplicity of your hearts, and take heed that you slip not any time of
hearings, nor prove false in your conception or bringing forth, but that both
calling and election may be made sure to you, not only by being in the
knowledge of it, but also by bringing it sorrh, that it may be your own for
ever: for that which you bring forth is your inheritance, and none can take it
from you, but you have power therein against all contrary spirits, which
whilst it is but in the motion, will strongly tempt and seek the life thereof
to stifle: but being brought forth, it is before you, and only so it is put on
as a brestplate, and becomes a defense, which being begot, and not brought
forth, it withers, and becomes as dry bones in the womb.

Therefore as you must give your minds wholly to hearken, so must you give your
strength wholly to obey: and when you feel the pure to move in you, with your
whole strength serve it, and bring it forth, give up your bodies a sacrifice
for his sake whom you have not seen, that his life may be made manifest in your
mortal flesh, and through you in the world, that he may be seen in his
brightness to you that love him, and before his Enemies, then is the body for
the Lord, and not for fornication: But if you rest in the knowledge of this
mystery, and bring not forth to life, with that knowledge you commit
fornication, and teach others to commit fornication also; this knowledge in the
disobedient mind becomes the mother of Harlots, and fornications of the earth,
with which the Kings of the earth are deceived, but none ever joined to God.

For it is not the hearing of the truth that purifies the soul, but the
obedience of truth which makes the Vessel fit for the Masters use, who in his
using, and its obedience makes it a vessel of honor, and glorifies his Son
therein, in a body prepared to do the Fathers will in the world, whereby the
Father is glorified in the Son, in whom he shines forth in the clear image as
the Father begets him again in you, and you in him, which was in him before the
world was, of his own nature and good will, which as you receive again by faith
and obedience, you will be changed into the same image and nature, and to
delight only therein, being born of the same spirit, as he that is born of the
flesh delights in the things of the flesh.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1657.


