The Secret Shooting of the Wicked, reproved; Or, A word to the namelesse
Publisher of that he calls Strength in Weakness, Or the burning Bush.
NOw is the living God visiting his people, and gathering his seed out of
Babylon and Egypt, and has called out his servants, and sent them to these
strange Kings with his Message, to bring out to light that which has been kept
in prison, whereat Pharaoh is exceedingly troubled, and the King of Babylon's
Posts meet one another with this Cry, Our Kingdom is taken at one end, the Sea
rages, and all that have treasures in Ships are gathered to stand up for their
God, and their King, to keep in bondage. But, from him that sits upon the seat
of iniquity, to the Magitians that use the enchantments to deceive withal;
yea, and upon all that believe them; shall the hand of the Lord be, to make
Babylon desolate, and to dash her Children against the stones which lie in the
streets thereof, which all the builders refuse. This is the Lords doing, and
woe to him that does resist him, who has sent his Word to strange Nations, and
to people of dark understandings, whether they will hear or forbear.

And thou amongst the rest, who calls thy self the publisher of what I writ to
James Nowell's Wife, but conceales thy name, as one ashamed of his vision,
saying, (in thy practice) Smite him secretly, as the backbiters and whisperers
of old ever did, stirring up prejudice in the minds of people, and making them
evil affected against the truth, so do thou against the movings and Messages
of the living God in his servants, rendering them under the names of sore
Temptations, terrible Adversaries, bitter Assaults of the enemy, and such like
corrupt words thou uses to inform the Reader withal, before he read the
Letters: and when thou have cast out thy venom against the truth of the Lord,
then thou covers thy self with feigned words, saying, I leave it to the most
wise and holy God to direct the wise in heart to consider them: Oh thou full of
all subtilty, was not God able to direct the wise without thy forestalling
slanderous opinions? how have thou helped God, or any wise man herein? had
thou printed them both, and been silent, then thou had left it to God indeed,
and I should have been silent also; have thou dealt moderately herein, or as
thou would be done unto? shall not the least of wise men Judge thee, and thy
spirit? nay, have thou not helped on the Devils Kingdom with lies, as I shall
bring no other witness against thee herein, but her whom thou so highly
Commends; for, says thou, her temptations, afflictions, and conflict, was
repeated and renewed so often as opportunity was given by her new visiters;
(which visiters are these letters which thou have published) but says she, I
am no way troubled at such continued charges; Now how must this be divided
betwixt you, seeing the one at least must be the Liar, both in this and diverse
other things I might instance: but I delight not to rake into such filth, only
I shall let thee see in a few words what a body of Confusion is in this
daughter thou art boasting of; which shame might have been hid, had it not been
for your glorying against the truth: and though to me both thou and she is
known without words; yet before others who yet judge things according to the
outward appearance, I shall take but a word or two out of her own mouth,
whereby her foundation might be discovered, to the least of those who know the
Kingdom. She says, she knows her self assuredly to be in the Kingdom of God;
yet still kept groaning for Adoption: I say, the Kingdom of God consists rot in
groaning for Adoption, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in that which is
holy, and none are there but sons who are adopted; no farther in the Kingdom
then newborn, and self denied, though she say her self is in the Kingdom,
which never came so far as a disciple where self is standing, much less not
into the Kingdom. Further, she confesses her own deceivings yet within her,
unjudged, which are yet to try; and the yoke of sinful Covenant in her, yet
unbroken; all which and much more may be taken from her own pen without
wronging her, as her letters (by thee) published may witness; yet withal this
she says, She knows her self to be in the Kingdom of God, when it is no other
but exalted into the Chambers of your own imaginary: for all who knows the
Kingdom of God can witness against you, that no such unclean stuff comes
there, no self nor self-deceivings; no sin, nor sinful Covenant comes there:
all this is in the Kingdom of Satan, and not of God, never was: or ever shall
be; blessed be God who has condemned out all that filth and Confusion, and all
that lives in it, that he may keep his Kingdom pure, therefore do the Virgins
love him: And had she known the Kingdom of God in her, she had never wondered
how I durst adventure to write to one whose face I had not seen, as she does
in her paper; and (says she) consider whether ever the Apostles or Prophets
thou art like herein: I say, did not God command his servants to write his
Message to strange Lands, and strange persons? and did he first send them to
look upon their faces to know what to write to them, or does that add to his
Word? Oh shame with your blindness herein; is God become as blind as you, who
cannot judge but by carnal appearance, and will you limit him to your selves?
that eye never savv? Prophets nor Prophesies, Christ nor Apostles: but this is
all you know of God or his Word, his Judgments and Kingdom, who are blindand
deaf, as to the invisible: and so the visible and carnal Judges, judging God to
be like your selves, imagines self to be in the Kingdom; but the blind and deaf
comes not there in that state. Had God no other servants but such as you, it
might be long ere the obedience of Christ and his sufferings should be manifest
in flesh, for the gathering his seed into the light, as ever he did send them
to strange people who declared his Word to them whose faces they had not seen,
to open their blind eyes, and so bring them out of darkness into the Light to
be seen, which to her is a wonder. And this is thy daughter thou boasts on, and
calls her a daughter of Abraham, who is a daughter of disobedience,
strengthening her self against the Word of the Lord, because the instrument had
not seen her face, resisting in her own will the tender of eternal love, and
this thou calls Strength in weakness, which is obstinate wickedness, and that
both she and thou must know, when you have finished your measure; and of her
blood I am clear for ever. And this is the bush thou boasts of which is not
consumed though fire be in it: I say, there is a time when the fire is in the
bush, and the bush unconsumed; then is the seed of God in Egypt under Pharaoh
and the Magitians, and in that state death reigns from Adam till Moses: Also
there is a time when the light of Israel does burn up the bush, and devour the
Briars and thorns in one day, then is that God known who is a consuming fire to
all that choakes his seed; go learn what this means, then shall thou see
whereof thou art glorying; and under that glory a fire shall be kindled. Who
would set Briars and Thorns against me in battle; I will go through them and
burn them together.

Thy murmuring against the Northern people is come before the Lord; thus says
the Lord, I have raised one from the North, from the rising of the Sun is he
come, upon you as upon mortar and clay; who declares from the beginning knows
him, and who is before time can say that he is righteous, but thou can not
hear him nor declare him, who consumes the bushes, and makes plain before him,
that he may plant in the Wilderness, and make it a Land of springs, for the
poor and needy to drink at, where shall come no more fear of Briars and Thorns,
but the little ones shall feed safely; this, death, knows not only the fame
you have got. Woe to you brambles and bushes who tears the lambs on every side;
Joseph's bough you know not, nor its fruit, (though you have got it to talk of)
you are the fruit of the cursed ground, your end is at hand: yet a lamentation
there is, (that does not Change) for the seeds sake,

By a lover of your souls, James Naylor.


