A PERFECT DESCRIPTION OF ANTICHRIST, And his false Prophet.

WHEREIN Is plainly showed that Oliver Cromwell was ANTICHRIST, and John
Presbiter, or John Covenanter his false Prophet.

Written in the Year, MDCLIV.

By ABRAHAM NELSON,

And now Published with an Epistle to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. and are to be sold at Westminster Hall, Fleetstreet,
and the old Exchange, 1660.

TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, CHARLES the Second, Of England, Scotland,
France, and Jreland, KING; Defender of the Ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolical Faith.
DRead SOVEREIGN:
NOw after your Majesty's most happy Return to your Kingdom, your poor
Subject has nothing to present to Your MAJESTY (save only in testimony of my
loyalty to your Grace and true affection which I bore to him which was made so
like his Lord and Master) But only a few Observations collected out of holy
Scripture Prophetically, and by Vision laid down therein; (which has been hid
since the world began) But now most dreadfully Acted in your days; the which
Observations I drew up in the year 1654. and reading it over to two especial
Friends and Royalists Mr. BRYAN NELSGN, and Mr. WILL: EDWARD'S of Norwich.
, By their persuasion and mine own Inclination, I resolved to put them in
Print, and with a Resolution to send your Grace a Copy thereof. But
considering that in the last Chapter of Daniel, the Angel commands him to go
his way. Seeing the words are closed and Sealed till the time of the end; In
Obedience thereunto I have reserved it till this present; But most gracious
Prince, I humbly Beg of Your MAJESTY so much time as to Read it over, and your
Majesty's pardon in that I cannot give (that is Eloquence with wisdom of words
most proper for such a Prophetical subject and due to such a Prince; But that
which is your Majesty's due (and can give) I present to Your Grace, that is my
Service together with this unburnished Piece; proceeding from a man of little
Learning, yet from a true and faithful heart; and whereas I have been loyal
and always ayding to him whose fame is made glorious without clogging my
Conscience with Protestations, Covenants. Judgments, or Oaths of any kind,
which brought utter Ruin upon my estate, and great affliction upon me, my Wife
and Children; Yet I chused rather in my allegiance to expose my self to any
sufferings, the same I shall be to Your Grace till (by Gods aid) I shall finish
my Course.

Your Majesty's, Loyal and obedient Subject, ABRAHAM NELSON.

To the Reader.
FRiendly and Impartial READER, J do here present to your view, a perfect
Description of Antichrist and his false Prophet, collected out of holy
Scriptures, which I writ in the year, 1654. You shall find upon serious
Consideration in reading hereof, that the transactions that has past since the
year, 1639. till the year 1660. to be the time of Antichrist his false
Prophet, their Increase and Reign, and their particular actions, perfectly to
fulfill their whole Description, set forth in holy Scriptures; together with
their Names, Mark, and Number of his Name, you shall also find Antichrist's
false Prophet, perfectly set forth, in opposition to CHRIST's true Prophet that
came before him; You shall also find the Antichrist himself, in opposition to
CHRIST our Lord perfectly paralleld: But though that the acknowledgement
thereof seem to cross the general Opinion of many Grave and learned Divines,
which I honor, who have writ heretofore, and to offend some others, which have
too much adhered to their late actions; My earnest request is, that they would
suspend their Judgments till they have read it over: And in so doing, then
parallel that which they have seen, known and understood (in these times) to
the Texts of holy Scripture quoted, which deciphers him out, and then they may
be satisfied of the truth of what is inserted: And though in my own person,
either for Learning or public Esteem, can give no Luster thereunto,
therefore in this I crave your favorable Construction: Neither did I undertake
this so great a business of concernment, in it self so considerable; Which
has troubled both Church and State to this day, neither for any private
Satisfaction to my self, or particular Interest: But being brought into great
affliction and sadness of heart, not only for my self, my Wife and Children,
through our great sufferings to the loss of all: But more a great deal for
the horrid Apostasy from so excellent a Government both in Church and State in
the days of CHARLES the first, the great Martyr of Jesus: -- So that I could
not be delivered from such Meditations as brought these Observations into my
mind: And having made it known to two especial Friends in Norwitch, they
persuaded me to put them in Writing, the which I did and has reserved it till
this present; Not that I was doubtful of the accomplishment thereof for God's
Glory, and our Good at the time specified: But in obedience to the Angels
command to Daniell, to go his way, seeing the words was sealed up till the
time of the End: For I had gone into Flanders this last Winter in February,
(but that I wanted Money) and there to have presented my Service to my
Sovereign with these Observations, knowing that the time was to be
accomplished in 1660. But so it is now with me, that in writing of this poor
Epistle to you, I cannot do it without tears: Considering Gods miraculous
Goodness to us, so wretched Sinners as to accomplish his Work in such Mercy
and Gentleness, and goodness to all: As that all faults may be buried in
oblivion in a little time, and all the loyal Party which was wronged,
prevented of bringing a great Sin upon themselves in their own Vindication: O
this great Mercy of God! Our King restored to us, our Laws executed, Gods
worship revived to the admiration of all the World, all fulfilled according to
his Word; Let us walk worthy of his Mercy in love to one another: This shall be
the Prayers of your Servant, as one of the Sons of the Church of England,
praying God that I may be found faithful before him, and acceptable to you.

Yours, ABRAHAM NELSON.

A DESCRIPTION OF ANTICHRIST.
REading in the holy Scripture of truth the Vision which the holy Prophet
Daniell saw in the days of Balshazar King of Babylon; I find in the 7. th
Chap. the 7. verse, a description of a most dreadful and terrible Beast.
First, he describes him by his Strength, to be exceeding strong. Secondly, by
his Teeth, to be of Iron. Thirdly, by his Horns to be in number Ten, and also
in the 8. th verse, he speaks of a little Horn that came up before whom three
fell. Fourthly, he describes this Beast to have Nails of Brass in the 9.
verse.

This monstrous Beast being described by his Shape, he also tells us what he
shall do: But of that hereafter.

Also reading in the 13. Chapter of St. John's Revelation, I find the same Beast
described, and look what Marks of the beast Daniell has omitted St. John
does describe them more fully.

He says, that he came out of the Sea, he says he has 7. Heads and 10.
Horns, and upon his heads the Names of Blasphemy. This ugly Monster he
describes in the 2. Verse to be like a Leopard, his Feet as the feet of a
Bear, and his Mouth as the mouth of a Lion; his Power and his great Authority
was given to him by the Dragon.

And the Dragon is described before in the 12. Chap. and 3. verse, to be Red
and to have seven Heads and ten Horns, and Crowns upon their heads. And J
find in the 11. verse of the 13. chap. another Beast described, To come out of
the Earth having horns like a Lamb, but a terrible speech like a Dragon.

These two Beasts described by St. Joqn, does exercise their Power to advance
each other, verse. 1^. he says, He exercised all the power of the first Beast,
and caused all that was on the earth to worship the first beast.

These two beasts be so joined together in the exercise of their Power; and
having their power from the Dragon, that they are sometimes said to be one.

But Daniell sets forth this Second beast unto us, in the similitude of a horn
that has a Mouth and Eyes, chap. 7. verse 8.

Now before these terrible beasts appear in the Earth and exercise their
power; I find in the 12. chap. and 1. verse, A wonder seen in Heaven, a most
glorious Woman, clothed with the Sun and the Moon under her feet, and
Crowned with 12 Stars.

She is also described to be with Child and in pain to be delivered.

But being in danger to be devoured by the Dragon and his Instruments, these
ugly beasts, God Almighty provides a place for her and takes her Child unto
himself, verse. 5. and 6.

Now by this most glorious Woman and her Son, is most certainly set forth unto
us the Estate of the Church of Christ, and the Sons of the Church: When these
monstrou^ Beasts shall appear, for some of the Sons of the Church shall lay
down their Lives for the Truth, and so is taken unto God.

Also in the 11. th Chap from verse the 1 till verse the 7. th is most
certainly set forth unto us the pure Preaching of God's Word for the Worship
and Service of GOD, that shall be in the Church of Christ in that place, when
and where these Monsters shall appear.

John is there commanded to measure the Temple of God, and the Altar and them
that worship therein: But is prohibited to measure the Court and holy City,
seeing it was to be trodden under foot by the wicked and profane, 42. Months
(that is 1260. days xxx. days to the Month) the same time the virtuous and
glorious Woman lies hid in the place God provided for Her, the 12. th Chap.
and 6. verse.

But for his two Witnesses they should prophecy in Sackcloth 1260. days,
these are the two Olive Trees and two Candlestick, standing before the God of
the whole Earth: Spoken of by Zachary the Prophet, the 4. th Chap. and 3.
verse, and the 11. th and 14. verses.

By these two Olive Trees two Candlest^cks and two Witnesses is set forth unto
us the K^ngly and Priestly Officers: As also the books of the Prophets and
Apostles, the Old Testament and the New, all which shall be in Power and had in
Estimation, and the Word faithfully taught unto us by his Apostolical
Ministers: When and where these monstrous Beasts appears.

And it is most certain, that these Monstrous Beasts shall be Enemies to God
his Worship and those that fear his Name,

That is manifest in the 7. th of Daniell the 25. verse, for it is said there,
he shall speak great words against the Most High.

And in the 13. th Chap. of Revelations the 6. verse, and he opened his Mouth
with blasphemy, to blaspheme his Name, his Tabernacle and them that dwell in
Heaven.

Now for the cruelty of this Beast, how this Beast shall prosper, and what he
shall do and how long he shall continue, that is necessary to be shown: But of
that hereafter.

But first of all, what is meant by the Sea and great Waters from whence this
Beast shall come, it is expressed Chap. 17. th and 15. verse, to be People and
Multitudes, Tongues and Nations, it is also necessary to know where they shall
appear.

He shall certainly appear in that place where the most pure preaching of the
Gospel of GOD and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is taught and upholden:
Both in Doctrine and Discipline, by Christ's Regal and Sacerdotall Officers:
And he shall oppose himself against all lawful Authority.

This great Beast is certainly the Man of Sin, the Antichrist, the Son of
Perdition spoken of by the holy Prophets and Apostles.

But now for the Description of this Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition set
forth by the similitude of these Monsters, it is necessary to show; Therefore
first of the body o^ this Beast, It is Multitudes of men in the World in Seven
several Nations, who will either voluntarily or by force comply to the Man of
Sin.

Secondly, the Heads of this Beast, is Princes and great men in those Nations,
and sometimes it is taken for the head City where they meet to consult: Called
the Royal City.

Thirdly, by the Horns of this Beast is meant the Kings of those Nations,
whereof one of them has four Dominions belonging to him: So these four and
the other six makes seven Heads and ten Horns: Rev^lations the 13. th and 1.
verse, Daniell 7. th and 7. verse.

Then Daniell expresses, that he saw another little Horn come up after them:
Before whom three fell; And that Horn is said to be the 8. th Dominion, and
yet one of the Seven, Rev. 17 chapter and 11* verse, that l^ttle Horn is the
Antichristian Horn, which by Daniel is said to have Eyes and a Mouth that
shall speak high things.

Now it is to be understood, that when this Man of Sin shall appear all the
seven Nations shall be Christians: But he shall arise and make his Seat in one
only Nation, and in that Nation where the most pure Preachings of the Gospel
are both in Doctrine and Discipline, and in that Nation whose Head has four
Horns, that is four Dominions belonging to it, though he do but exercise the
power of Three.

But upon the appearance of the little Horn, the three Dominions which the
former King had shall fall to him, and the former King shall be plucked up, Dan.
the 7. th and 8. verse, but of that hereafter.

Now that Antichrist is set out unto us by this little Horn in Daniell, and
the Beast out of the Earth in John: It shall be apparent by what he shall do
answerable to that which is written of him.

Also by the Description of his Name and Mark, and the first Beast by his Name
and the number of his Name.

Therefore to make it plain, I will show it more clearly by setting forth and
showing the Dignities of Christ.

First, as the Son of GOD. Secondly, as a King. Thirdly, as a Priest, and as
the Son of God had before his appearance a Forerunner, a great Prophet, a
Messenger to go before his face to prepare his Way.

So the Son of Perdition shall have a great Prophet, a Forerunner, a Messenger
to go before him to prepare his Way; And as the Son of God was sent from
Heaven by his Father, endowed with Kingly and Priestly abilities to redeem his
people; So the Son of Perdition shall come out of the Earth from his Father the
old Serpent the Devil; And shall usurp to himself both the Kingly and
Priestly Dominions, to seduce a people from the true Worship of God, to worship
himself and the Dragon.

But first of all, I will compare together Christ's true Prophet, Forerunner,
and Messenger that came before him.

And Antichrist's false Prophet that shall come before him.

Christ's Forerunner his Name is John so named of the Angel, Luke the 1. and
13. verse: He is a Priest also: And in verse 72, and 73. he is said to come
to perform the Covenant, and the Oath which he swear to Abraham and his Seed.

Antichrist's Prophet and Forerunner shall be called John Presbiter, but more
properly his Name is John Covenanter.

For he shall come with a Covenant and an Oath in opposition to the Covenant
and Oath of God, and shall pretend to do the Offices that Christ's Forerunner
came to do, in Preaching Repentance and pretending to a Reformation.

The other Offices that Christ's Harbinger did perform was to make the Way
straight, and to turn the hearts of the Fathers to their Children, and the
Disobedient to the wisdom of the Just: And to make a people to be prepared for
Christ the Lord, Luke the 1. and the 17.

But the Offices that Antichrist's Harbinger shall perform for all his
pretenses shall be to make the Way crooked, and to turn the hearts of the
Children from their Fathers, and the obedient from the wisdom of the Just: And
to make ready a Rebellious People prepared for Antichrist.

And as the people which John Baptist did prepare, did accept of the Covenant
and Oath of God, and was distinguished from others and became Christians.

So shall the people which Presbiter John shall prepare, accept of a Covenant
and Oath which was from his Father the Devil: And thereby be distinguished
from others and be called Covenanters.

This is the first Beast which John saw like a Leopard, which cannot change his
Spots.

And first for his Name it shall be John Covenanter, and the number of the
words in his Preamble and Covenant (that makes his Name) is the number of his
Name, let him that has Wisdom count them, for they are 666. mentioned,
Revelations the 13. Chap. and the last verse.

As it is to be seen in the original Copy of the Kirk.

This Covenant shall combine all his Creatures in one, and unite them for Lives
and Estates to serve him: The Enemy of God and all good Men.

And as John Baptist came with a mighty Power, so that all did muse whether he
were the Christ.

So shall John Covenanter come with a mighty Power, trampling all under foot,
Daniell the 7. th and the 7. And with such a false Zeal; So that all shall muse
thinking him to be the Truth of Christ, though he shall be the Forerunner of
Antichrist: I have now described the Name of Christ's Messenger and his Power
and Office, so that he is the greatest Prophet of God that ever was amongst the
Sons of Men.

And the Name of Antichrist's Messenger, the number of his Name, his Power and
Office, so that he shall be the greatest Prophet of all the false Prophets that
ever shall be amongst the Sons of Men: For he and the Antichristian Beast with
the Dragon shall work wonders; They shall throw down the Stars, Revelations
the 12. th and the 4. verse, and they shall cause Fire to come down from
Heav^n in the sight and presence of men, the 13. th and the 13. verse* This is
nothing else but the pulling down of the King, the learned Clergy, Bishops and
Church Officers, which is compared to Stars and Fires in Scripture.

And it must be a mighty wonder to see this done; Now it is necessary to show
unto you the Offi^es of CHRIST the Lord of Life, and his Power (his Way being
prepared) his Name and his Mark: Also the Offices of Antichrist the Man of
Death and Destruction, his Name and Mark, his way being prepared before him.

First for the Offices of Christ, he is a King, Matthew the 27. th and the 11.
and Hebrews the 1. and the 8. But unto the Son he says, thy Throne O God is
for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness.

He is a Priest also being the Priest of the most high GOD, and of the Order of
Melchisadec, Hebrews the 5. th and 6. verse, and his Name is Jesus so named of
the Angel: And his Mark or Ensign is the Cross which we take in Baptism,
and which Christ says, all that will follow him must take up.

Now the Power of Christ in the exercise of Kingly Office is proved, Psalm 2.
and 9. verse, Revelations the 19. th and 15. verse Out of his Mouth goes a
sharp Sword, and with it he shall smite the Nations, and he shall rule them
with a Rod of Iron: And shall tread the Win^presse of the fierceness of the
Wrath of God.

And of his Priestly Office, Hebrews the 4 th and 14. Seeing therefore we have
a great high Priest, that is past into Heaven Jesus the Son of God: Let us hold
our Profession.

Now I shall show unto you the Offices of Antichrist, his power, his Name and
Mark, in opposition to Christ his power his Name and Mark.

First, he shall take unto him Dominion: That is Kingly power, Daniell the 7.
th and 25. verse, the middle of the verse. And he shall think to change Times
and Laws both Civil and Ecclesiastical, and they shall be given into his
hand.

He shall also take upon him Dominion over (Episcopal Authority which is
Apostolical, that is) Priestly power, to command Worship: As in the 13. th
Chap. and 4. verse, it is said: They worshipped the Dragon which gave Power to
the Beast, also Paul says, He shall set himself in God's Temple as God, and
against him to depose and set up whom he will without Law or Example: Save only
exemplified by his Type, that is Antiochus the Type of Antichrist under the
Gospel.

And for his Name it shall be equal with Christ's Name, that is Jesus a
Savior, a Protector to his people: And for his Mark it shall be a Cross
wherewith all his shall be marked and commissionated to do his works in the
World, and that none shall be permitted to buy or sell, or to do any thing of
Concernment without his Name, his Mark or number of his Name before spoken of,
Revelations the 13. th Chapter, and the 17. th verse.

Now ye see what a Combination Antichrist (when he comes) shall make: All
that are for him must have his Name, others must have his M^rke; And some must
have the Name and number of his Name, and some shall have all.

But before this Tragedy shall be acted, we shall find that our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ shall seal his obedient ones, least they should be
deceived by the policy of the false Prophet, and the prosperous success of the
Man of Sin; For it is said, If it were possible they would deceive the very
Elect.

In the 7. th Chap. and the 2. verse* I saw an Angel ascend out of the East
having the Seal of the living God, and in the 4. verse it is said: There was
sealed 144000.

I have made it appear what Power the Man of Sin shall have, and Offices he
shall usurp.

Now I shall further show you the Exercise of his power, what he shall do: I
have shown how he shall trample all under foot, and change Laws both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, now I will show you how he shall make Wars* and against
whom.

In the 7. th of Daniell and the 21. it is said: I beheld and saw the same
Horn make War with the Saints and prevail against them.

And in the 13. th of Revelations and the 7. verse and it was given unto him to
make War with the Saints and overcome Them: In overcomming the Saints he shall
first take away the chief Officers of the Church, that i^ the King, and
Bishops and their lawful Officers, and prohibit the true Doctrine and
Discipline Apostolical to be used: and when he has taken away the Church
Officers, to suppress the Professors is easy.

For the King that then shall be shall fall before him, which exercises the
Power of the three Horns, Daniel the 7. th and 8. verse, in the middle of the
verse, I considered the little Horn says he, before three of the first were
plucked up; and in the 24. th verse, he says, He shall subdue three Kings or
Kingdoms and there he shall plant himself.

Now for the continuance of the time he shall have to stand in his Power; It is
requisite I should speak of it: That after he appears in his splendour we may
hope for his end, lest we should faint in the length of our sufferings.

In the Exercise of this woeful Tragedy against the Saints of GOD, we find he
shall speak great Words against the Most High, and weary out his Saints, the
7. th of Daniell and 25. And in the latter part of the verse it is said, he
shall continue a Time, Times, and the deviding of time: John says the 13. th
Chap. and 5. verse. He has Power to continue 42. Months, which is three
years and an half, that is to measure and account his Time by.

And I find that upon the increase of his Power, he shall be so prevalent in
(opposition of God's word) persecuting the Regal and Apostolical Officers of
CHRIST, as that the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, together with the two
Candlesticks of the Church of Christ; his two Officers is said to be slain and
lie dead in the streets (and in the sight of all men) for three days and an
half, Revelations the 11. and the 7. th: And by reason of the Toleration that
the Man of Sin shall grant upon the suppressing of the true Worship and
Worshippers of GOD, and taking away the public Liturgy of the Church, there
shall be a very great joy: So that they shall give and send Gifts one unto
another and make merry, Chap. 11. th and 10. verse.

Because thereby they were hindered of their Liberty, that they could not
exercise their several Idolatrous, Fantastical, and Heretical Opinions.

And during the time that these two Prophets, and two Witnesses lies slain and
dead in the streets in open shame and contempt: The true Professors of the
Gospel shall be clothed in Sackcloth 1260. Chap. 11. th and 3. verse.

According to the number of the Days the virtuous Woman (that is the Church)
is hid by God in the place which he has provided for Her, the 12. th Chap. and
6. verse.

And then after the time limited be over shall their Sackcloth be put off, and
the Woman come out of her place, to help forward the Judgment of the Man of
Sin.

But during the Time of the hiding of this Chaste Woman and the Persecution of
her Children; There appears another Woman, Chap. the 17. th and the 3. verse:
A Great Whore, a Jezabel wonderfully D^cked: By whose Glory Thousands are
bewitched.

By this Whore is set forth unto us Antichrist's superstitious Whore, and the
City where he shall keep, and the Idolatrous Brood he shall beget.

Now all men know or will confess, that Men are naturally subject to Idolatry,
and therefore is fitly compared to a Whore, and Antichrist when he comes will
tolerate men thereunto; Now if an arrant Whore be tolerated by Law, what
Wickedness is it that she will not commit with a Brazen face? And also abuse
the most Godly Virtuous and Chaste Woman that can be found.

Now I will but speak a very little of his Power more, least I digress too
far.

Jn the 13. th Chap. and 4. verse (it is said) And they worshipped the Dragon
which gave Power to the Beast, and they worshipped the Beast and said, Who is
like to the Beast, Who is able to make war with him.

Also he shall extend his power a great deal farther then his own proper
Dominion which he has usurped; For his Name and his Mark shall go through
the earth, Revelation the 13. th and the 8. th verse. For it is said, All that
dwell on the Earth shall worship him; For he shall extend all power into the
Channels of the Sea, and great waters. So that Nations shall maintain their
Traffic by him and shall do it by his Name and Mark, wherewith his Patents
shall be sealed and Articles of Peace or War marked and sealed.

He shall be like that Leviathan (spoken of by Job) that walloweth in the great
deep.

Now I think it necessary to the making of this great Tragedy plain, to
speak of the matter of Worship a little as it comes in order.

Kings and Princes, and chief Priests, in holy Scriptures are called Gods,
being sanctified by divine Power; and also the same Scripture does command
worship and honor to be given them.

Now we may read in the 13. chap. Revelation the 3. verse, That one of the
beasts Heads was wounded to death, and his wound was healed.

You may remember that I said before, That the heads of the beasts were Nobles
and great Men, or such as is of the Kings Council; and the horns are Kings;
now when the Horns by force falls off (aforementioned) the Head on which it
does stand will receive a wound.

But when the little Horn grows great, he shall cause the beasts head to be
healed, by electing another Nobility of his own Tribe; which is set forth unto
us by the word Image: And well may be called an Image, in comparison of the
other that was before it; But however it must be Worshipped; For in the 13.
chap. the 15. verse. He had power to give life to the Image of the Beast, that
the Image of the beast, should both speak and cause, that so many as would not
Worship the Image of the beast, should be killed.

And I will show you more things that this Man of sin shall do expressed by
Paul his 2. Epistle to the Thessalonians, 2. chap. 4. verse, it is said there,
That he shall oppose himself above all that is called Gods and are worshipped.

Now his forerunner shall be a man of Worship (as John Baptist was) when he
comes.

But the Man of sin, shall be a mean Man and no man of Worship; neither
shall any be proper for him.

Therefore it is truly said, When he comes and plays his Pagents above
Kings and great Men on the earth, that he exalts himself above all that is
called Gods unto whom Worship belongs.

And in the first of Paul to Timothy, the 4. th and the 3. verse, he says, He
shall forbid to Marry (that is) He shall alter the ordinary practice of the
Church of GOD in marriage, which was solemnly performed by the Ministers of
CHRIST, according to Gods word; commanding it to be done by those that are no
Priests: which are Commissionated by his Mark, and also upon a penalty of
Disinheritance, as Bastardizing their posterity.

He shall also command Fasting-dayes, and prohibit Festivalltimes, which the
Church had celibrated; as the time of CHRIST'S Nativity, his Resurrection and
Ascension (and the like) far worse then any Pagan.

But it is more proper to Antichrist's forerunner which shall come like John
Baptist; Neither eating nor drinking, but with a great deal of temporance and
Purity to deceive, though it be proper to him what the People said of John,
That he has a Devil.

Now I will speak of Antichrist and his false Prophet jointly, being united to
advance each other; therefore first of their beginning and so of their growth.

And that I may make it plain, I will compare the Lord of life and this
Messenger of Death together.

In the 2. of Luke, the 46. th 47. and the 48. verses. Christ was found of his
Parents disputing amongst the Doctors in Gods Temple (it seems to me to be the
Puritanicall Pharisees with which he disputed, and) which he calls so often
(afterward to his Disciples) Hypocrites: giving them command to take heed to
them.

This was the time of CHRIST's beginning and increase to do his Fathers
business, till he was Baptized in Iordain of John. Then being in the full
Exercise of his power after his Baptism, he continues therein till his
Ascension, 42. Months or thereabouts, in all, one and twenty years.

And a little before his Suffering Matthew the 21. chap. the 12. verse, Enters
into the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the Money changers, and those that
polluted his Fathers house, he drove out; saying, that they had made his
Fathers house a den of Thieves.

The same time shall Antichrist have till he come to the height of his power,
that CHRIST had, till he was Baptized; after which time he shall think
himself lawfully Installed to his Jesus ship to him and his for ever.

And as Christ first began his most Gracious work in the Temple, and so
continued till he whipped the Prophainers out as aforesaid.

So shall Antichrist and his false Prophets begin, they work to do their
Fathers business in disputing against the true Doctors, Professors and
worshippers of God in his Churches and Temples, till they drive out of Christ's
Churches his faithful Officers and Professors, and make them Stables, Courts
of guard, and consequently a den of Thieves.

Now it is requisite (he being so perfectly marked out) that it should be made
known, what shall become of the Man of sin, and what shall be his judgment.

It is said in Daniel the 7. th and 11. I beheld then because of the voice of
the great words which the Horn spoke, I beheld even till the Beast was slain
and his body destroyed and given to the burning Flame; And in the 26. th verse,
The judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion to consume it,
and destroy it to the end: And in the 19. th of the Revelation the 20. th
verse, John says; That the Beast was taken and with him the false Prophet that
wrought Miracles. with which he designed them that had the Mark of the beast
and worshipped his Image; these both were cast into the Lake of Fire burning
with Brimston.

But seeing in the same Chapter, there is mention made of a whorish Woman,
which I have a little spoke of before, J will touch it a little as it lies in
the way.

In the 3* verse, John was carried into the Wilderness and there he saw the
whorish Woman riding, in the same Place and upon the same Beast which
persecuted the most Glorious woman the Church.

John sees a Cup of abomination in her hand; and in the 5. verse, We saw her
Name written in her Forehead, Mystery Babylon the great, the mother of Harlots
the abomination of the Earth.

This Woman was drunk with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of JESUS which
made John wonder.

This Woman shall be the Royal City where the Man of Sin shall make his
Seat; and in which the Antichristian Representative body of the Beast, and Head
of the beast, does Consult, and gives Antichrist, that is the Horn his power.

In the last verse of that Chapter, it is said; The Woman which thou saw, is
the great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; sor by their
prevalent Power (during their Antichristian compliance) both by Sea and Land,
they are said to Reign over the Kings of the earth.

And in the 7. verse of the 17. th chap. The Angel says, He will tell John
the mystery of the Woman, and the Beast that carries her.

And in the 8. verse, he says, The Beast on which the Woman sat was and is n
c, and shall descend into the Bottomless pit and go into Perdition, and they
that dwell on the Earth shall wonder, whose lives are not written in the Book
of Life from the foundation of the World: When they behold the Beast that was
and Is not* and yet is.

This Beast shall be Presviter John, and the first great Assembly of
Republiques that aids him; ( which was) --

That is, he shall be in great Power when the Man of sin appears with his
Toleration. He shall lose his Power and Dominion when the Man of sin is
apparently come; (and therefore it is said, He was and Is not. (And it is said,
he yet is:) Seeing he shall give himself and his Power to uphold the Man of
Sin, after which he shall recover his Power and being, and therefore is said
( he yet Is.)

And then it shall be accounted a wonder of all, whose Names are not written in
the Book of Life from the foundation of the World; when they behold the Beast
that Was and Is not, and yet Is.

In the 10. th verse, he says; There are 7. Kings whereof five are fallen, one
Is and another is Not yet come, and when he comes he shall Continue a short
space.

That is, five of those Kings shall submit themselves to certain Conditions,
and to the Jurisdiction of the Man of Sin* and City where the Man of sin
sits, intimated by the word fallen.

It is said one is, that is himself and his City, as it is said, by the old
Babell he only Is and No other.

And it is said another is Not yet come, he stands out a little longer then
the Rest, and it is said, When he comes he shall continue a short space.

This great City and her Antichrist, is said to sit on seven Heads, which is
seven Mountains, that is 7. distinct Dominions, verse 9. One which he shall
particulerly Command and makes his Seat, and Six which he shall bring under
Conditions.

So this is No more in effect then has been said before, only confirmed by
more Testimonies.

And in the 11. th verse it is said, The Beast that was and is not, is the 8.
th, and yet of the Seven, and shall go into Perdition.

This Beast that was and Is not, is the same was spoke of before, but here is
said to be the 8. and is of the 7. th in the 11. verse.

It is certain he is of the Seven; but how he is said to be the Eight J
conceive it thus: --

That when he is come near the time of his Destruction, and to the end of his
account for his Antichristian Dominion; The right Heir shall appear to come
into his Kingdom, and shall come with the aid of the other Six (which formerly
Antichrist had brought to his Conditions) those Six with his own Nobility
makes up 7. Heads; Then Antichrist and his Nobility makes up the 8. Head: And
in the 16. th verse it is said, These shall hate the whore and burn her with
Fire.

And verse 17. th it is said, God has put it into their hearts to fulfill his
Will and agree together: And give their Kingdoms to the Beast until the Word
of God be fulfilled.

Then comes those Kings to act right things, when they promise and give Aid
to the lawful Heir, which before they could not, during the height of
Antichrist's reign.

Now J have shown unto you the Destruction of the Man of Sin, his Prophet and
their Whorish brood.

Now it shall be apparent that GOD shall take away Antichrist's Dominion by
Daniell, the 7. th and 19. verse; And in the 13. and 14. verses, He gives it
to his Son: it is said, there was given unto Him Dominion, Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all People and Nations should serve Him: His Dominion is an
everlasting Dominion which shall not pass away and his Kingdom, that which
shall not be destroyed.

Then Christ when the Kingdom is given to him, he gives it to his Saints to
be possessed by them* as it was before when Antichrist and his Adherents began
their Wars against them.

That you may read in the 22 verse: The Ancient of Days came, Judgment was
given to the Saints of the Most High: And the Time came that the Saints
possessed the Kingdom.

And in the 27. verse, and the Kingdom, and the Dominion, and the Greatness
of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the People of the
Saints of the Most High whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom: And all
Dominions shall serve and obey Him.

Then shall the Days come, spoken of by Zachary the Prophet 14. th and the 9.
verse: And the Lord shall be King over all the Earth, in that Dayshall there be
one Lord and his Name one.

Now it is requisite to show unto you the Joy that the Saints shall have for
Antichrist's Destruction and for the Destruction of his Whorish brood: Seeing
GOD works so great an Alteration, Revelations the 14. th and the first (there
he says) he saw a Lamb standing on Mount Sion having with him 144000. Having
their Father's Name written in their Foreheads

And in the 2. verse he says: He heard out of Heaven the voice of Thunder, the
Voice of Waters, Harpes harping, and in the 3. verse: They sung a new Song
before the Throne, the books of the Apostles and Prophets, the four Beasts,
and Elders which were redeemed from the Earth.

And in the 6. verse, the Messengers of God goes forth with freedom to preach
the everlasting Gospel, to them that dwell on the Earth, to People, Tongues,
and Nations.

And in the 15. the 3. verse: That those that got Victory over the Beast, over
his Image* and over his Mark and the number of his Name Sing the Song of Moses
the Servant of the Lord* and the Song of the Lamb? Great and Mavelous are thy
Works* Lord GOD Almighty: Just and true are thy Works, Thou King of Saints!

And in the 4. verse, Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name,
for thou only art Holy? For all Nations shall come and worship before thee; For
thy Judgment is made manifest: And verse the 5. th, after that Song the Temple
of the Testimony of the Tabernacle was open.

And in the 19. c^p. He heard a Multitude of People which song Haleluja,
Salvation, Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord GOD. read Revelations the
whole Chapter.

I have shown unto you the great joy that shall be upon the suppressing of
Antichrist.

I shall also show unto you a little, the sorrow of those that favor Him, and
such as has his Name, his Mark, or the Number of his Name.

All those that have committed Fornication with Her shall bewail Her, and
lament for Her, and cry and cast dust on your Heads: the 18. cap. 9. verse, 11.
verse, 18 verse.

Now I have shown in brief the great Mystery of Antichrist, and his
Forerunner, his great Prophet, their Rising and Power, what they shall do and
how long he shall continue, I have also shown unto you their Subversion and
Overthrow.

And I have shown un^o you the Joy that shall ensue to the People of GOD: And
the sorrow of those that adhere unto the Man of Sin, and his Idolatrous brood.

And I have shown unto you the most Glorious Preaching of the Gospel that
shall be after their Subversion: So that one Title of Gods Word shall not fail
of what is inserted in the Book of God.

That which I have written is in brief, for if I had the Tongue of Men and
Angels, and were the best Scribe in the World, it were impossible for me either
to speak or write, or you to hear or read the most unnatural bloody and
damnable acts of the Beast, his Prophet and their Lives, even their very Claws
and Nails on their feet being of Brasle: to Plunder and Scrape the very Flesh
of the bones of Gods people, Daniel the 7. th chap. and 19. verse.

But when men sees these things come to pass* which is Collected out of the
word of GOD, let them lift up their hands which hang down, and their feeble
knees, and make straight steps upon their feet, as Paul says, Lest that which
is halting be turned out of the way.

It shall inform weak Consciences, and confirm them in the truth.

It shall be a Caviat for many to take Salomons counsel, (that is) If thou
have stricken hands and been snared with the words of thy mouth make have,
deliver thy self.

But more especially to do as our Lord Savior CHRIST commands (that is) Agree
with thy adversary quickly whilst he is in the way with thee, least he
deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Iaylor.

It shall be a means to Convert the Jews, when they see Antichrist play his
Pagents on the earth, and God fulfill his judgment upon him, Being so perfectly
Marked out by his Prophets and Apostles, and foretold so many hundred of years
before he come.

It shall also Reconcile the great differences amongst the Christians: But
especially betwixt the Papists and Protestants, which has so long time
contended about this thing unto Blood.

It shall Increase the torments and anguish of those, that are still obstinate
Enemies of GOD and does not Repent.

And finally, It shall cause all both great and small, things in Heaven and
things on Earth, and under the Earth, to bow the Knee at the Name of JESUS,
even so AMEN.

This sad Tragedy being past and gone,
the Saints shall live at peace and ease at home:
Till Gog shall make them to be sore dismayed,
his wicked Pagents then that he has played.
But Consolation great to the Saints will come,
after he has had his dreadful Doom:
For final Sentence shall not long be driven,
till the Saints shall all for ever be in Heaven.
J will further add this:

That the false Prophet when he shall first appear shall be by Profession in
his Religion, a false Dependant, (Puritanicall) who by his rigid Curiosity and
Scrupulous Nonconformity: Shall make way for a Toleration of Antichristian
Independancy.

Further you may observe in 1639: That from their Covenanting and first
Entrance into the Field in open force and public Hostility against their
lawful King and Priests (the Lords Deputies) till the time of their Subversion
shall be (that is in 1660.) One and twenty years: Answerable to the time that
Christ our Lord disputed in the Temple with the Puritanicall, hypochriticall
Pharisees, till he ascended into Heaven as aforementioned.

But more for particular Distinction of Time: As near as may be (it may be
observed) that for the first Ten years and six Months* which is three times
42. Months, the Antichristian false Prophet shall most popularly carry on his
wicked designs, deceiving the People by Lies, pretending to be for the King
and Priests, till they may utterly destroy Both: And consequently Gods holy
Worship and so out them, as Antichristian by Lies and Scandals.

But for the later ten years and six Months, the Antichrist himself by the
assistance of his bloody Crew shall advance his Dominion.

For the first 42. Months of the later Ten years and an half, the Antichrist
shall be made General, and give a Toleration to all his Antichristian Impes.

And for the second 42. Months, Antichrist shall take upon him to be the
peoples Savior and Protector: And his false Prophet shall comply with him, and
be protected by Him.

And for the last 42. Months, he shall actually be confirmed in his
Jesus-ship: And his false Prophet, with all their deluded Spirits, shall give
Honor unto him as lawfully installed in his Jesus-ship for ever, both for Him
and His.

Yet before the 42. Months be expired a great darkness of Confusion shall be
in his Kingdom, that they shall know their Tongues for pain, Revelations the
16. th and 10. verse.

And also before the last 42. Months be out: The right Heir shall come to
possess his Kingdom, as is aforementioned.

This they shall see: All those that lives in the Days of Antichrist, the 42.
Months of Antichrist's Dominion; And his false Prophet spoken of (by the
Ange^l) to John: And the Time, Times, and the dividing of Time spoken of (by
the Angel) to Daniell: Really fulfilled to the Sight and perfect Knowledge of
all the Observers thereof: If they will but count.

And if Pharoah's Dream was doubled twice, much more shall Antichrist's 42.
Months be doubled thrice, for the Ratification thereof before all the World.

But courteous Reader, look what thou have here read is none of Mine, only
collected by me out of holy Scripture, (therefore give God the Glory.) But it
is so brief, that it is far short of what may be observed by the judicious
Reader out of holy Writ: Though it be promiscuously laid down therein, as we
may observe in all Prophesies: (that Men as natural may see and not perceive,
and hear and not understand; for if it were by way of History then it were no
Prophecy) as we may observe in the 24. th of Matthew, and such like
Prophetical places they be Mysteriously laid down.

But I would have you to observe, that every Spirit that pretends to stand for
Christ, and does oppose his Dominion here upon Earth by his Deputies, Kings,
and Episcopal Priests, does therewith deny the true Doctrine and Discipline of
Christ's Church: The same must undoubtedly be the Antichrist.

Antichristian Spirits there was from the beginning, by the Enemy of Mankind in
opposition to the promised Seed Christ.

But they never prevailed to set up a Dominion as aforesaid, to fill up the
whole Latitude of his Description.

Read for your Sat^sfaction the 26. of Numbers, what became of Core and his
accomplice^: And read the Epistle of Jude his Prophecy of Antichrist, whereof
Cores Rebellion against Moses their King, and Aaron their Priest was a Type of
Antichrist's Rebellion under the Gospel.

Read also the 10. th of Leviticus: The History of Nadab and Abihu offering
st^ange Fire to the Lord: A Type of the abominable Worship and Sectaries
(tolerated by Antichrist) in the time of the Gospel.

But though these did not prevail to set up a Dominion, yet Antichrist the
Typified shall prosper, prevail and set up his Dominion as aforesaid: And all
his evil Spirits shall prosper with him, all that ever were or shall be, and
shall do what is written of Him.

But the antichristian Spirits that shall assay to set up a Dominion before the
Time of the Antichrist, the Son of Perdition, cannot.

For Paul says to the Thessalonians, 2. Epistle and 2 Chapter, only he who
lets shall let till he be taken out of the Way; and in the 8. verse, Then
shall the Wicked be revealed.

And it is to be understood, that He who has let and does let is the Angel of
the Church: And the King Christ's Deputy, where this Man of Sin shall arise,
who is appointed by GOD to protect his Church from such Malignant Spirits,
according to his Promise made to his People, as to the Patriarchs and to Moses
to aid them: That for their and the Churches safety, his Angel should go
before them.

The like assistance does attend Christian Kings under the Gospel, but when
Gods Angel is restrained from ayding the King in protecting of Christ's
Church, then shall Antichrist appear and prevail, The King and Bishop.
and the two great Witnesses of GOD shall be murdered in the Street, and lie A
Bishop may be Antichristian, being against Monarchy.
slain in that City which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, Revel. the
11. chap. and 8, and 9. A Monarch may be Antichristian being against
Episcopacy; But he that is the Antichrist must be above and against both.
verses.

For be assured Christian Reader, he shall be against Christ when he comes,
and against Christ's anointed Ones: Such as are commissionated, consecrated,
and set apart for his most especial Service under the Gospel.

And will presume to be above Christ* as he is a Savior administering his Power
here upon Earth (till his second Coming) by his lawful JESVSES, his Deputies
here: And so he will set himself in Christ's Dominion or above Him.

Absolutely to take away the Regal and Sacerdotall Officers of CHRIST: And to
suppress the true Professors.

Till the Ancient of Days sit, and Judgment be given to the Saints of the Most
High as aforesaid.

All which for the Glory of our God, and of his Son our Lord and Savior, (in
the right understanding hereof for our availes) I refer unto God: And for the
Performance of his most Sacred Word, we ought not to doubt.

Therefore as I said before, let us all both great and small, bow the Knee at
the Name of JESUS: Even so AMEN.

Now I doubt not, but I shall have the favorable Construction of all the Sons
of the Church of England herein.

But for such as has not known it through want of years, and those that
through weakness have been seduced from it: My Desire is that they should
return, and profess the Catholic Faith established in England, and professed
in the Days of Charles the first, the Great Martyr of JESUS.

This shall be the Prayers of him, that wishes Grace and Peace till the
finishing of his Days.

Your Servant, ABRAHAM NELSON, of Garsdale in Yorkshire.

FINIS.

