FOOT yet in the SNARE: Though the Beast has healed his wound, and now
pretends liberty, but is fallen into the trap of the Priests, receiving their
testimony to bear it up, who are in the pit themselves, thereby giving them
occasion to insult against the Truth, as the Beast and the false Prophet has
always joined against the Lamb.

Discovered in an Answer to John Toldervy, Matthew Pool, William Jenkin, John
Tombs, John Goodwin, William Adderley, George Cockain, Thomas Jacomb, and
Thomas Brooks, Who under a pretense of love to the truth, have gone about to
devour it, and cover it with reproach.

Wherein their crooked ways, their confusions and contradictions is traced and
laid open, and their spirit tried to be the same which joined Judas and the
chief Priests, and their false witnesses against the Heir at his appearance; so
these have joined testimony to the truth, of a lying book, which by their own
confession they never read over.

With something of their false testimony in short laid open, left simple minds
should be led with a lie through the fame of the Forgers.

By one who loves the soul, but hates the sin, called, JAMES NAYLOR.

And the chief Priests after they had hired Judas to betray Jesus, they sought
many false witnesses to put him to death, but their witnesses agreed not
together.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's, 1656.

FOOT Yet in the SNARE:
GOOD is the Word of the Lord, who by his Spirit has foretold of the Heathen
raging, and the people imagining vainthings, thereby to stop the appearance and
exaltation of the King of Righteousness, in every age of his coming into the
world, who has also foretold of the gatherings together of the great Armies of
Gog and Magog to battle against the Lamb, with all the subtilty, sorcery, and
witchcrafts of the devil, that old *Serpent and hater of innocence, who ceases
not to stir up his chiefest interests, and those whom he has deceived and
bewitched with lies and lying wonders, joining together head and tail, root and
branch in that nature, to trample upon the appearance of Christ, and shut up
the Kingdom against men; and for this end (as one of his deepest designs) he
is ever seeking to get in amongst the children of Light with his Son of
Perdition, conforming himself as near as may be in outward things, yea
transforming himself into an angel of light (a thing above all the litteral
professors) that thereby he may the more strongly delude, and make the way
more open whereby to make havoc of the innocent, doing that under a pretense
of owning the truth, which he never could do with open opposition; and this is
his design, which ever attends the appearance of the Son of God in this world,
for so is the fathers good pleasure to permit him, for the trial and exercise
of his own seed where it is manifest: and thus it was with the Son of God in
his appearance amongst the Jews, where one of the twelve was a devil, and by
his treachery to the light, and convincement which he had received, the chief
priests and pharisees got their envy effected against the Lamb (he being an
instrument for them against him) which they never could do by all their disputes
and open contentions and oppositions: and so it is seen at this day by thee
John Toldervy, and the chiefpriests in these days joined with thee herein,
joining your deceits against the innocent way of the Lamb: and this design of
Satan the spirit of God has foreseen, and revealed to his holy apostles and
prophets, which was to continue for the trials of his own at his coming amongst
the saints in after-ages; and therefore Paul at his departure does forewarn
them to take heedun to the flock and church of God, which he had purchased with
his own blood, not only warning them of grievous wolves which would enter in
amongst them not sparing the flock, but, says, he, also of your own selves
shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them to
perdition; and these are the heresies which the Scripture tells of, which the
Holy Ghost says must be amongst the people of God, that they that are approved
may be made manifest; and it does not only manifest them 1 Cor. 11. 9:
that are approved, but them that are for perdition also; and these things were
not strange to such as dwelt in the light, nor are they strange to such as in
the light dwell now; who see there cannot be a war, unless there be a Dragon as
well as a Lamb, and the beast with the many heads and horns, with blasphemy on
every head, as it is seen in you of many colors, heads, and horns joined
together in this blasphemy, as does now appera, and will appear more plain
concerning you in this thing, than before, who have set to your hands to
certify the belief you have concerning the truth of the devils actings, who is
a liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, nor does he abide in the
truth; and to all who are in the least measure of light, you have discovered
your selves with whom you join, and against whom you take part, though your
secret smiting cannot touch the truth, nor them where it is manifest; all you
can do is to shut up the kingdom against such as are in the world with you,
least they should enter, as did your fathers so do you, and of their reward
shall you receive, having fill'dup your measure: three sorts of people there are
that are much concerned in this filthy thing you have hatched and brought forth
(besides the common scoffers of these days) as a snare to catch withal, and
to devour in the way by consent, as your fathers ever did. The first sort of
which the greatest envy is, are without the reach of your trap; and those who
have received the light of Christ, whose eye is in their head, who are come to
any measure of the anointing, and are joined in the election, in the least
measure there abiding, are set above all the devils deceit and lying wonders,
who are brought to the love of the Lord, his light and life; to such I say,
this and all other things that can befall in this world, work together with the
light for your good, and therein I do rejoice on your behalf, who shall hereby
not only glorify God who has opened an eye to see above all these wiles of
Satan, whereby they are judged, and the ground from whence they arise, but also
hereby learn the more to fear the Lord, and to walk worthy of him in your
measures, who has called you out of darkness, wherein others are stumbling and
falling in mischief, into his mavelous light, wherein abiding you will all be
taught by this as by all other his works, to know his end as to your selves,
that he may teach you his praise both in redeeming his own seed, and also in
hardening the wicked to destruction: The second sort are such as in their
hearts are convinced with the light of Christ of the way of truth, but finding
it straight to their carnal pleasure and profits not loving the truth more than
the world, but taking pleasure in unrighteousness, and serving and loving the
creature more than the Creator, such will be glad of a stumbling block, to take
occasion thereby to cast off the yoke wholly, and so to speak evil of that
which they are convinced to be the right way, and would have walked therein,
had it not been too straight to hold them and their lusts. To such I say, you
have your desire herein; and as you waited for a stumbling block, thereat to
take offense at the Cross, so God in judgment has sent you one suitable to
your desires, even from him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with
signs and lying wonders, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them
that perish, because you received not the truth in the love of it that you
might be saved; for this cause God has sent you strong delusions that you
should believe a lie, that you all may be damned who take pleasure in 2 These. 2.
unrighteousness more than in the cross of Christ: And as the Spirit of
Witchcraft in the Magicians did harden Pharoahs carnal proud heart more against
Moses and the seed of God, so will the same spirit take advantage upon your
lusts to do the like, though in a different manner, yet to the same end, and
upon you is the righteous judgments of God in this case, who are joined to
that nature which God has raised up to show his power upon; and in the end you
will find that you are of them upon whom this day of the Lord comes as a snare,
when you are grown up into your measure of hardness and enmity against the
light of Christ, opportunities to which you will not want from the Lord in
judgment so long as you abide in that nature, and the love of it, whereof in
love to your souls I am moved to warn you.

There is a third sort, for whose sakes I am moved especially to write
something in answer to this filthy thing, which otherwise (being a work of the
devil) it should have rotted rather than have been raked in, or mentioned over
again by me, and these are such as have a simplicity in them, and a love to
the truth, and the way thereof, and would walk in it, did they know it, but are
yet kept in blindness and darkness by their blind guides, who take advantage by
these works of the devil, lies, and slanders to thicken the veil and
strengthen the bonds, whereby to keep them from the light of life, and way of
peace, and so keep them in the way of destruction for their corrupt ends, which
were they not ensnared in these things through their deceit, might possibly be
brought forth into the ways of salvation, many of them already having been
made sensible from the Lord in love to their souls, of the barrenness,
unfruitfnlness, and unrighteousness of the worlds ways, wherein they have been
led; and also the deceit, pride, and covetousness and contrary-walking of their
Teachers, both in doctrine, manners, and maintenance, to all those whom ever
Christ appointed for the work of the Ministry in any age. I say, for you who
are in this case, out of the knowledge of God, his light, and life, which is
your salvation, does my bowels yearn, being sensible of your condition from the
Lord, and how easy a thing it is for you to be kept in delusion, (by the false
teachers) who are not come to the true light, especially, having such things as
these, with your lying spirit to work upon, whereby to affright you from the
truth, which many simple hearts are enquiring after in this day of the Lords
love; as also, knowing that any being begun to be unsettled from the deceits by
the Light of Christ, and then come to be settled again by a spirit of deceit,
and joining therewith; seeing such deny the tender of love, how hard a thing it
is for such to be recovered to hearken to any thing from the Lord in spirit to
bring them near him: I say, for your sakes where the simplicity is, am I made
free to lay* open to you some of the deceits of these Spirits that lay wait for
your souls, that unless you choose your own delusion rather than the simplicity
of truth, you may not be by them ensnared, as the Light of Christ in your
consciences will one day witness my tender love to your souls herein.

And to you John Toldervy, Tho. Brooks, Tho Iacomb, George Cockaine, Will.
Adderley, John Goodwin, John Tombs, Will. senkin, and Matt. Poole, who are
joined together, that with the light of Christ you might* take notice against
whom you are joined, and what work it is you are joined in, which is, to bear
witness unto lies, and confusions, and lying wonders, which you never saw nor
heard, as by your own confession, who say, some of you have but perused a part
of the thing to which you are witnesses, and have but the things by hear say,
and that from one possessed with a deluded Spirit, wherein you show your envy
and rashness, and want of discretion, and therefore are found falsifying your
own words in your book, and so have ensnared your selves in your own
wickedness, and this you call The foot out of the Snare, and so your work is
begun with a lie, and so carried on, who in your title page tell of the manner
of his separation from the Quakers, which is false, for those you call Quakers
did separate from him, and deny him, both in word and writing, because of his
following a bewitched Spirit, and would not be reclaimed by them, who often
reproved him, and judged him for it with one consent, as you afterward confess
in your book, page 38. and in other places of your book also. As in your
title page* also, you tell of what judgment he was learned in by the Ministry
of those people, and so bear witness you know not to what, for both you and he
are yet unlearned in the judgment and Ministry of those you call* Quakers,
whose judgment and ministry is not to be led by vain customs and
imaginations out of the truth, as you are, and are witnesses that he was, as in
your book is declared. In your Epistle you say the subject matter of your
discourse, relates principally to the persons who go under the name of
Quakers, and you confess that many have abused the truth by seeking to defend
themselves in that deceit, which the Spirit which is of God in those you call
Quakers, has witnessed against, by which (you say) the generality of men are
through their* misguided spirits, already beyond measure, bitterly incensed
against them; to which, I say, let your practice judge you, as to the work in
hand, in seeking to defend your selves in that deceit which the spirit of God
in us has witnessed against. As to the particular actings of that deluded
spirit with whom you are joined witnesses in your book, and so are of those who
have abused the truth, thereby more bitterly to incense the generations of men
beyond measure against us, through your misguided spirit; yea, so much I may
say, the devil had never yet such a design on foot, for the incensing people
against those you call Quakers, as this Book of yours, which you have filled
with the devils works and lying wonders, wrought and witnessed amongst your
selves, whereof we are clear, from the first to the last, having been witnesses
against it; and yet you are not ashamed to say, the subject matter does relate
principally to the persons of the Quakers, which was acted and witnessed among
your own persons, which are joined one in it against that spirit of God in the
Quakers, by which it was denied in the persons of them, both root and branch
thereof, as is confessed and witnessed by you. So let all judge who have the
spirit of truth, if you be not those misguided spirits (you tell on) beyond
measure, who are casting upon us the deceits acted amongst your selves, and yet
confess the spirit of God in us witnessing against deceit; so out of your own
mouths be you judged to be those who take part with the deceit (acted among
your selves) against the spirit of God, who have cast upon us the works that
are done amongst your selves, of which we are clear in the presence of God Yea,
Judas and the chief Priests might as truly charge what they did in combining
to gether against* Christ, upon the other eleven Disciples, as you charge* this
your act and combination upon the persons of the Quakers, or the spirit of God
in them, the case being the same, both in respect of matter and near as near as
possibly may be* and how guilty the Disciples were, of that* or we of this,
let the light of Christ in all consciences be Judge, til he appear to reward*
you according to your work.

Further* in your Epistle you tell of expressing tenderness to wards your
brethren* and companions, who by their misguided spirit are subject to Laws*
and Ordinances, Ceremonies and Traditions of their own inventing, denying
themselves their Just and Lawful Liberty, out of a slavish fear: to which, I
say* as for Ordinances, Ceremonies, and Traditions, and Inventions, they are
your own, and so is that misguided spirit, which led in the inventions to what
was acted, as is declared in this book, as also that misguided spirit by which
you are led in your worships, you Parish Masters, and separated-Masters, who
have lost the form of the Saints worship, and with your misguided Spirit are
run into the inventions in every particular of your worship, which you perform
in your Idols Temples, so that the Scripture will not warrant your practice in
any particular, without wresting* to suit your inventions* so it nearlie
concerns you to plead for tenderness toward your brethren, who are companions*
with you in this misguided spirit, and subject to those Ordinances and
Inventions into which you are run* that you may also partake of that
compassion* who never loved to be plainly dealt withal* nor reproved for
your* errors. But as for them who are come from under that misguided Spirit
with its Ordinances and Inventions* it may be long ere you be heard pleading
for compassion to such; nay, against such is all your misguided Ordinances, and
misguided spirits, with all their inventions combined together, as appears in
your book, who have joined testimony to the works of the devil against the
spirit of God, under a pretense of love to the truth, as you would plead for
your misguided spirit, Ordinances, and Inventions, under a pretense of
compassion, and so you show to all then are wise hearted, what your compassion
is to. But as for denying your selves of liberty lawful or unlawful, you are
little guilty of that crime, but would accuse others for doing it, because we
cannot run with you into your excess of pride, drunkenness, and gluttony, and
all manner of lasciviousness, and shelter it with you under the name of
Christian liberty, therefore you speak evil of us who see your wickedness,
and cannot join with you therein, who under the name of Christian liberty
have opened a door to your hearers of all liscentiousness, as woeful experience
may witness throughout the Nations* what pride and oppression, what excess and
lasciviousness, drunkenness and gluttonnie, gaming, sporting, and wantonness;
what changeable fashions, and foolish childish toys in your habits which you
are pleading for in your book, which sober minded heathen would be ashamed of;
what Idolatrous worships, speaking high words through the lusts of the flesh,
beguiling the souls that are unstablished; what Idolatrous days and feasts,
what imprisonment, persecution, and bloodshed; what swearing and whoring,
foolish jesting, and filthy communication, idle talking, and all manner of
abomination is lived in amongst you and your hearers, and all covered with the
name of Christian Liberty; And if any make conscience of these things, they
are presently condemned by you for denying themselves their Just and Lawful
Liberty, accused of whi^sies and voluntary humiliation, and of works* and so
the devil has got Scriptures and the Saints words to plead for his lusts, and
condemn the Saints practice: And how much you parish masters value the just
liberty of such as witness against your unjust dealings, the most of the Goals
in the nation may testify: So the liberty of Barrabas bespeaks the death of
Jesus, and his imprisonment. Do not ye remember your fathers the Bishops, who
under pretense of Christian Liberty, set out their Play books, giving them
names of lawful recreations, which indeed were the devils practices? and are
not you got upon the same beast yet as blind as they, and as full of rage (had
you the same power) against them that reprove you thereof? But as for any
liberty we deny which is according to God, charge us with it in particular,
and let truth make its defense. You tell again of giving account of John
Toldervy his separation from the people called Quakers: I say, that is but the
former lie told over again, for the people called Quakers did separate from
him, when he was separated from the light, and acted by a spirit of darkness
and would not be reclaimed.

In your cautions to the Reader you confess, that his errors from what was
written in the Scripture and ^in himself, was that by which he dearly
suffered, having before cast it upon the persons of the Quakers; and this is
the truth which you are satisfied of, as you have signified with your hands,
but are found with deceit in your mouths. If it was his departing from the
Scriptures, and what was written in him, that was his error and cause of his
sufferings, then it was not the persons of the Quakers, which before you said
was the subject matter of your discourse, and that which did relate
principally to their persons; neither was it any judgment he learned by the
ministrey of those people, as you seem to hold forth in another place, and thus
you are not ashamed to utter your deceits, and believing* of lies, to tell
them, and set your hands to them, thinking thereby to have them pass as
unquestionable truths, and to that end recommend them to all Christians, and so
are found abusing the truth, and defending the deceits which you confess the
Spirit of God in those you call Quakers has witnessed against, and so through
your misguided Spirit are incensing the people beyond measure in bitterness
against us, show your selves to be of that Spirit which did ever oppose the
Spirit of God, which you confess to be in us, as out of your own mouth you may
be judged:

In your first page you bear witness with John Toldervy who you say has been
for diverse Years full of zeal after the things of God, seeking after the
knowledge of Christ, for the clearing of his conscience to his close walking
with God, and blameless life and conversation amongst men. And in your 49. page
you bear witness to him, that before he was principled in the way of the
Quakers, he had been very zealouslie affected in diverse ways, and there was
begot in him much fleshly wisdom, in which his hope did much rest, believing
it was the mystery and wisdom of the Holy Spirit revealed in him; and that
he was covered over with deceit, and did glory* in that condition; and both
these must be believed to be truth by your certificate, and this you have
recommended as a piece worthy to be read and taken into consideration by all
serious Christians. But may not all that consider of it see you stark blind and
drunk with abomination and confusion? Could Zeal to God, and exceeding Love
toward Christ, and ways most useful for clearing his CONSCIENCE* in order to
his upright and close vvalking with GOD, and blameless Life and CONVERSATION
amongst men, and resting in much FLESHLY* WISDOM, and glorying in being
covered over with deceit, stand together in one person? and both these you say
he had in his profession before he joined with the Quakers; what a testimony is
this that you nine are joined in! Do you think it will excuse you to say that
you read it not all over? with them whom you have blinded it may, but the least
of the children of light may see you are erred from the truth, and joined in
deceit, witnessing you know not what.

And in your second page you tell of a spirit infused into him, by the
operation whereof, together with what he apprehended of himself, after a short
time, there was made clear to his understanding what follows; so that by your
confession this spirit from which he had those apprehensions, was infused into
him before he knew the Quakers, after which he became affected with those
people called Seekers, and afterward met with two of those called Quakers, and
yet the drift of your book is to make people believe that he received this
spirit among the Quakers, and this is another piece of your recommended truth,
so with your own hands you have signified your confusion, and cleared them whom
you intended to slander.

In your third page you tell of the Quakers that what they spoke was against
all sin, yet they declared nothing of the mystery of the Gospel of Christ; so
that by your doctrine, that which declares against all sin is nothing of the
Gospel of Christ. I say, if you had said* it had been nothing of your Gospel,
you might have been believed, whose Gospel and the mystery thereof is by
talking against sin to make a cover for sin: But there is nothing that speaks
against all sin indeed and in truth, but the Gospel of Christ, though another
Gospel many of you have invented, wherein you can imagine a Justification to
your selves while you are the Servants of Sin, but by the Gospel of Christ
which speaks against all sin, do the Quakers know whose Gospel that is, which
justifies you, while you are the Servants of Sin, and live in it, and encourage
your hearers therein also: Are you not ashamed to give it under your hands,
that that which* speaks against all sin is nothing of the Gospel? Was that
nothing of the Gospel when he said, Sin no more, lest a morse thing come upon
thee? If this was any thing of the Gospel, or the mystery of it, then all may
see that you nine are joined in a lie. And to say that the Quakers speak
nothing of the mystery of the Gospel, let thousands that have heard them be
witnesses against you, whether this be not another; yet by your nine-fold cord
you would have these to pass for truths.

In your seventh page you tell of one whom he knew to be a very serious true
hearted man which was converted to our belief, which gave John Toldervy to
understand, that the person, that Son of God, that dyed at Jerusalem, was not
the Redeemer of man from sin. To which I say, Did you hear that man say so? or
have you it from him who is possessed? or did you ever admonish that man of his
error to his face before you slandered him before all the world? Have you done
herein like Christians, or as you would be done unto? Or did you ever see his
face? Or do you know his name? and why is it not here mentioned, that we might
have admonished him though you will not? Have you not herein discovered your
Spirit, and your selves a pack of slanderers and backbiters, to accuse a man in
print whom you never* saw* nor spoke to? one without name; all that are not
blind may see this stone is not cast at one man, but against the whole truth,
and upon your own heads shall it return, for all that ever knevv those people
called Quakers, will bear us vvitness that we own no Redeemer but that Son
of God which died at Jerusalem, whom we witness in us, the Light by which we
see sin, and by obedience thereto are led out of sin.

In your eighth page you seem to reproach the Quakers, saying, You know some of
them who fasted 30. or 40. days: Let the Adulterers cease seeking for a sign
or a miracle in this generation, seeing this is witnessed with your own hands.
I say, if you had lived in the days of Moses* Elias, David, Daniel, and other
the Saints of God, and the Apostles, who made proof of their Ministry in
Fastings and Prayings; yea Christ himself should have had no better from you
than scorn and reproach therein, fasting being a thing which your generation
known little of, nor are exercised in, whose care in the first place is for
your bellies, and all must fast about you before you want your hire which you
expect from them, which many times you do no work for, yet war is prepared if
they put not into your mouths, suits and prisons, yea many times where the
children want bread, and whereof you stand in no need; so that there is little
thoughts of your fasting. But would you be counted Ministers of Christ and
follow him, and is fasting become a reproach with you? David declares of your
generation, by whom his fasting was turned to his reproach by the bellie-Gods
of his time; and the same spirits now act the same things.

In your nineth page you tell of two Spirits in him, one contrary to the
other, by which he did many things in his will, against his will: And in
your 49* page you say, before he was persuaded to complie with us, he had a
right knowledge of our belief and practice; here is another piece of your
confusion manifest; had he a right knowledge of our belief and practice who was
thus acted, for which you confess he was judged by all the Quakers? and thus
your false witnesses will not agree to the end you intended, only it serves to
manifest your own absurdities, and that confused spirit to which you are
joined, which you say led him to do things in his will, against his will, whereby
you say he became a destroyer of the will of God, and this you would cast upon
the Quakers; whom you confess to have the Spirit of God in them, witnessing
against all Deceit and misguided spirits, as though the spirit of God which
witnesses against all Deceit, did lead him to destroy the will of God; and
afterward confess in the same page, that it was his imaginary, which being
overthrown in one thing, there was begotten the like being, in another shape;
thus adding your confusion, as though the like being could be in another shape,
by which you say he was wrought upon to believe many things, and act many
things, as follows, and yet your drift in the book is to accuse the Light of
Christ therewith, as though his imaginaries were the Light of Christ: and much
such unsavourie stuff your slanderous spirits send out of the bottomeless pit.

Then you go on and tell of his believing of what was manifest of God in man,
is the Light of life, and one with himself, and that man was the cause of all
his distractions and confusions in himself, and that man having lost the
kernall and substance, he feeds on dry husks, and being not refreshed with
bread and water of life, he remains always seeking and never satisfied; and
that eternal life living in us there needs no more thirst; and that
confusion proceeds from the evil one transformed in man, who having darkened
his understanding, leads him to many duties that are his own, and that if the
author and finisher of our faith live in us there is perfection, and that in
the first Creation man was made pure and holy, etc. and many other precious
truths which nearly concerns the salvatton of every soul to know, and these*
being things which the Devil most envies, you have mixed with them some of
your own Deceits, thereby the better to make people believe* they are errors,
and having heaped a great sort of them together that you might (strike at the
whole foundation at once, then you say that you will declare some of those
effects which this change wrought in him, going on to tell of his filthy
practices, being led with flies to crucify himself, and to burn his Legs, and
prick Needles in his Thumbs, and such filthy bewitched stuff not worth the
mentioning, being the devils work.

You blasphemers, did those truths of God before mentioned lead to these
things? how are you filled with subtle envy against the truth? was there ever
such a nest, to set your hands to slander the truth? shall not the Lord find
you out, and bring your wickedness upon your ownpate* shall your joining hand in
hand keep your wickedness from being punished? what you have done in secret the
Lord will reward you openly, the day of Revelation is at hand, and you can be
no longer hid.

You go on to tell how he was moved not to pull off the hat to any man; to
speak the word THEE and THOU; not to bow or worship any man, not to direct his
mind in drinking to any; to pull off his Points at his knees, and his Buttons
that were unnecessarie, and such like things which you would loath see go
down, and therefore give it as though it was the Spirit of the devil that
bare vvitness against these things, and so would condemn the spirit of God and
practice of the Saints, for the upholding of the Devils work, who is not
divided against himself, who has too many amongst you to make covers for
pride and excess, to set any on work to cry it down, or your flattring
titles either. Did ever the Spirit of God use any other language to a
particular than Thou or Thee? Does it not forbid bowing or worshipping any
man? Or did ever any who are guided by the Spirit of God put off their hats
one to another in vvale of Worship or Complement? Or did they ever use the
practice of you Drunkards, drinking one to another, enticing one another to
devour the creatures upon your lusts, by your heathenish customs? Or did they
ever use Points at their knees in your manner of filthy pride? May not all see
what you are about to uphold? Are you the Ministers of Christ or the Ministers
of sin, who are pleading for pride and the worlds customs, and whether this be
not the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life, which
is not of the Father? Let your Testimony that you have set your hands unto, be
witness against you.

Have you taken moneys so many Years for preaching against sin, pride, and
drunkenness, respect of persons, and creature-worships (and lived in it?) and
now that Christ is come to bear testimony against it in practice, and to cast
it down in his Creatures, are you now forced to set to your shoulders, both in
word and writing, lest it should fall? Do not the most of your Pulpits sound
every day against those people who cannot bow to these filthinesses? Who
would have believed (had they judged by your words) that you would have been
found the Ministers of sin and Antichrist? Is this your foot out of the Snare,
or a bringing all feet into the Snare? Is this a Restoration of the Inhabitants
of Zion into their place, whose words tend to uphold such things whereby Zion
is captivated, and Babylons Brats restored into their place? Herein you are
seen, for this is the day of Revelation, and righteous Judgment which is
coming on, and by your works you must be proved, and not by your words, and
your reward shall be accordingly.

Then you go on to tell of the working of this power upon his Spirit, and that
by his persuasion of this wa^e he was engaged to make restitution of forty
shillings which he had adventured to take unwarrantablie: So you condemning
that Spirit and way which caused the restitution, are found the justifiers of
that which took it falsely. So all may see who love truth and honesty, what
Spirit and way you are engaged against, for that spirit which took the money
before, was not that which forced the restoration, neither was that which
pulled off the pride, the same that put it on again and pleads for it; these
two are contrary as much as between the just and the unjust, a true man and a
thief, God and the Devil: and you being forced to confess this thing (to his
praise by whose spirit he was moved thereunto) you have thrust it in amongst
his deceits to render it odious as a work of the spirit of the devil; but that
is your deceit, who would blind the works of God by mixing them among the works
of the Devil. The children of Light see you, for that spirit we own which
caused him to make restitution, which caused him to cast away his pride and
heathenish customs, creature-worships, and respect of persons, and brought him
into the form of sound words; but that spirit we condemn which took the money,
has put on the pride, denied the faith, and run into respect of persons, and
we see that to be it which led him into the Witchcrafts, for Thieving,
Witchcraft, Pride and Idolatry, are all of one Spirit, and that spirit was
condemned by those who believed the Apostses Doctrine, who confessed their
sins, burned their books, and made restitution: And here are the two spirits
you tell on, which were in him, the one contrary to the other; but when he
denied the Spirit of meekness which condemns the thief, and the pride, then the
other Spirit exalted, and led him to follow his damned imaginations; having
denied the Light and Spirit of Peace, joined to the proud, exalted, and
deceitful Spirit, God in judgment gave him up to the Spirit of Delusion,
which being seen, he was by us denied and his spirit also, as is very well
known, both to himself and diverse more. And all you who have joined with him in
this spirit, to deny that spirit which caused the restitution, are seen in the
eternal Light to be in the same state with the chief priests and rulers, who
joined with Judas, who bare the bag in combination to betray Christ, and this
you will find when the day of account comes; when each Spirit will be seen as
they are, and they that join with them; then shall not you be hid, who have set
this work on foot, raised out of the depth of Satan; till then we are not
ashamed of that spirit which caused restitution, condemned his pride, and bare
witness in him, if he had minded it, against all his lying wonders, divinations
and Sorceries: And in that Spirit are we willing to suffer all the reproach of
the Heathen, in love to justice and meekness; so take your own with which you
are joined, and think not to be hid under a pretense of clearing the truth, no
more than Judas could be hid with a kiss; and you will see at that day, that
what you have done is but to dig the pit deeper, into which you must fall, for
from the Lord your counsels are not hid: And before all the world do we own
that Spirit which leads to truth and meekness, and humility, and do declare,
that the denying of that spirit was the cause of all his delusions, and he
shall know that that was his day of visitation. And you that have taken part
against that Spirit, at that day shall know your blasphemy, and your condition
you may read, Mark 3. 29. 30. Read their work, and who they were, and read your
own.

And in your 17 page, you say, A short time after his compliance with that
spirit which entered into him by the observation of our practices; and in your
second page you say, This spirit was infused before he went amongst the
Seekers, or knevv the Quakers; so it was far unlike to enter by the
observation of our practice. And by the observation of our practice (you say)
declared to be from the teachings of the Spirit, he denied his master, and
afterward denied all relations, went and sat down at the head-end of the
table above his Master, and justified the deed of it, and went into Cheapside
to gather up cabage stalks and colwort leaves, which were cast away, to eat; and
was possessed that Christ Jesus which died at Jerusalem, was a figure of him, and
that he was the true Christ, that the dissolution of all things would be at the
end of 63. years, and that there was a greater Revelation to be made manifest
in him than was in Christ, to believe in outward appearances, and spirits in
likeness of a man's shade; to believe in lying Spirits and take them for Angels,
and that he should be made perfect in 25. days; and that he was to suffer,
waiting for, and desiring apparitions, which would come and go at his desire,
dancing and flying about the Room, and he dancing himself with them; choosing
Apostles, believing in spirits singing and hissing like Bees, calling them the
Angels of the living God; kindling fire with dead coals, and such lying
wonders, taking a Fly to be a Messenger of God, and being guided by Flies,
gathering sticks, leaves, and small stones, laying them by themselves, casting
some away, and keeping others, waiting for direction from the blaze of a
candle, burning his Flesh at the fire at the observation of a Fly, wrestling
with himself, imitating the crucifying and burying of Christ, and much such
like bewitched imaginations, which Spirit you affirm entered into him by the
observation of our practices, and by a spirit that entered in thereby: O you
shameless men! are not you led by the same bewitched confused spirit with which
you have taken part, by which you are so blinded to vomit out your own shame,
and utter out your confusion before all the world? have not you before
confessed that this spirit was infused into him defore he came among the
Seekers, or ever knew the Quakers? And have not you confessed in your 49. page,
That the cause of these distractions and confusions in his mind, was, having
been zealously affected in diverse ways before, there was begotten in him much
fleshly wisdom, in which his hope did rest, believing it to be the Holy Spirit
revealed in him, and that he was covered with deceit, and could glory in that
condition: and in your 50. page you confess the light of the Spirit, which if
followed, would have guided out of the works of the flesh, and led to the
worship of God in spirit and truth; but he being naturally of a very hasty
forward mind, and his resolutions being a covenant of his own, he was hastily
carried forth before the true light, by which in a short time he became lost in
his understanding, and exal^ed mightily, and the enemy which was for
condemnation having thereby darkened the true light of the Sun, formed it self
in the shape of the true light, and so deceit got the power, whereby he became
obedient to these things before related, by which the simple became exceedidgly
deceived. Is not this your own confession under your hands? and dare you join
to blaspheme and say, that this was by compliance with that spirit which is
declared to be from the teachings of the spirit of Christ in us, when you your
selves had cleared it in plain words, and laid it upon his Fleshlie-mindedness
and deceit, whereby he was hastily carried forth before the true light, which
if he had followed (you say) would have led him out of the works of the Flesh,
into the true worship of God in spirit and truth. Are not you in the sight of
all who know the spirit of God, seen to be led with the same drunken, confused,
blasphemous spirit, to slander the teachings of the spirit of Christ with these
things, wherein your own hands testify against you? And in your 32, and 33.
pages, when he was working these wonders, pulling off his band, gathering
sticks and leaves, serving the devil and (say you) in the time of this
service, by the persuasion of diverse of those you call Quakers, sometimes he
would give over, but when given over, he would be commanded by the first fly he
saw to that service again. And afterward in page 38. do you not confess, that
when he came to the meeting at the place where the Quakers were, showing the
holes he had made in his thumbs, and telling of these lying wonders which he
had been acting, many of the Quakers being there, all of them judged him with
one consent, charged him to be silent, and told him that he was in darkness,
and had slain the witness of God in him. And in your 51. page you confess he
was restored to a right understanding, and his life became a clear light by
being guided in that obedience which was professed by those people; and all
this being your own confession, and signed with your own hands for truth, you
are not ashamed to charge all these things upon a spirit that entered in by the
observation of our pract^ses whom you call Quakers. Was there ever such a heap
of confusion and falsehood uttered and signed for truth by a pack of men stark
drunk with envy against the truth? shall not all who know our practices be
witness against you herein, that never any of these practices was owned by us?
and be you witnesses against your selves for ever, that you are of that
generation who had ever the mouth open against the innocent, they being moved
to bear testimony against your filthy practices is the cause of this envy,
as witness all your generation throughout the Scriptures, and all the Histories
of the innocent sufferings, to reproach, persecution or blood: When did ever
any of this befall the innocent Lambs of God, but you were the instruments to
set it on foot, and carry it on, under the name of heresies, or blasphemy,
sometime possessing the Rulers of the earth, and sometimes the people
therewith, as though you were zealous for God, when it is for your own ends to
vent your envy against the righteous seed at his appearance? Was it not the
chief Priests who joined hands against the Prophets, who were sent by the Lord
to bear witness against their false Doctrine and greediness of hire, wherefore
they could never be^at rest with any thing short of their blood? Was it not the
chief Priests who combined against Christ with many plots and temptings, and
could never be at rest till they prevailed with a Judas to betray him? (the
case now in hand*) And how often they sought the life of the Apostles, the
Scriptures make manifest; yea, they would join with murderers therein, under a
pretense of performing a vow, besides the innocent blood that has been shed
since in every Generation, and is there any in this City but they are ashamed
to have a hand in so filthy a thing? or to cast upon a people that are
innocent such a slander, any but your selves? So consider your work, and the
confused thing you have set your hands to, wherein you have been forced so
often to clear us of the thing you have so often accused us of, and to the
world declared your selves, whereof all the world cannot prove us guilty of
these deceits wrought by him, further than to testify against him and them,
and that Spirit by which he was acted, as we do against that Spirit by which
you are now acted in your lies and slanders, which is the same Spirit, for the
Sorcerer, the Murderer, and the Liar, is one Spirit; so you who have cast
these things upon the persons of the Quakers, which your selves do testify
they denied and judged with one consent, let all men see by what spirit you are
led. Was there ever such a thing done amongst the people of God? Had you lived
in the Apostles times would not you have slandered the ttuth, and the persons
of the Saints with the Act of Simon Magus (though it was much better than you,
who sell that which is not the gift of God?) Would not you have charged the Act
of the incestuous person upon the Apostles, and that of Ananias and Saphyra
upon their Doctrine? and that of Judas upon Christ and his Disciples, which is
the like case. And had this been just dealing to accuse the innocent? or have
you done* herein as you would be done unto? would you have all the filthiness
of your hearers, the drunkenness, whoring, the witchcrafts, the murders, the
persecutions, the swearings, the Pride, the Covetousness, and all abominations
in the Land (for amongst your hearers, you Parish-masters, it all is) would you
have it raked up and cast upon your persons? nay, though some of it you be
guilty of; nay, would you who are the false witnesses in this paper against
the innocent, have the abomination that some of you are guilty of gathered up
and cast upon the persons of the rest? consider of it. If you had any part of
the true worship of Cod in your Steeplehouses, would you have it slandered by
one whom you cannot reclaim, and therefore have denied? would you hold them
guiltless who should gather up all these things, and much such like which is
amongst you, not denied (as we have done him) but pleaded for, and printed it
in a book, and set it out, with many false aggravations, and say the subject
matter does relate principally to the persons of you, and subscribe hands to
it, and say, they are certified of the contents and circumstances of that
discourse, and are fully satisfied of the truth of things reported in it, and
so commend it to all, as a piece worthy to be read, when you confess some of
you have but perused a part thereof, and then be forced in the same Paper to
clear you of the same things: this being the true case betwixt your selves and
us, whose persons you have slandered, take it into consideration, and let the
light of Christ be Judge in you, whether you have kept the royal Law, to do as
you would be done unto, before God; let him be witness (whose Spirit you have
blasphemed) this day between us and you: Also, let all the Judges in this
Nation give their testimony, and all that understand Law between man and man,
if such a Witness deserve not the Pillory, or punishment suitable to his
slander, who would dare to be a witness against another in things he never saw
nor heard, as you confess some of you have done, though I am far from desiring
that any of these things should befall you, but that you might come to see your
unjust dealing after the manner of men, being that the things of God you
understand not, being heart-blind are become past feeling, and so given up to
shameless things, to set to your hands as witnesses to such contradictions and
confusions as is in this your Book; yet to become as certain witnesses to that
which you confess* you have but seen part of, and so set to your hand to you
know not what. Was ever such a thing done by any that feared God? moderate
Heathen would blush thereat. Have not some of you been the wisdom of the
Nation? But how are you fallen! and how has envy besotted you! Is not the Word
of the Lord concerning your fathers in fulfilling now upon you? The days of
your visitation is come; the days of recompense are come; Israel shall know
it: The Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man Hosea 9. 7, 8.
is mad for the multitude of their iniquity, and the great hatred: The Prophet
is a snare of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.
Praises, Praises to our Redeemer, who frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and
makes Diviners mad: that turns wise men backward, and makes Isa: 44. 25. 27
their knowledge foolish: that says to the Deep, be dry, and I will dry up the
rivers, that he may make way for his kingdom through the depth of the
sorceries. In his works we rejoice, who has given us an inheritance therein;
yet for you there is a lamentation, knowing the shame that must cover you, and
the woeful day that must come upon you, which is near at hand.

You go on further in your deceit to make a cover for all this filthiness, and
when you have fathered all these lying wonders upon the persons of the Quakers,
then you go about to clear us of it again; and in your 49* page you say he had
a clear understanding of what our Ministry held forth, and had a right
knowledge of our belief and practice before he did comply with us; and here
you add another lie to cover the former, for he never had a right knowledge of
our belief or practice, for all that are in a right knowledge of our faith and
practice, deny all such things, and by our faith and practice was he denied,
who acted such things.

And then you go on to tell the occasion how he came to be lost in his
understanding, and so distracted and confused in mind; and this you say you
will do for the Truths sake: Oh ye full of all subtilty! Have you cast out all
this venom upon the Truth in your Book, and are you now about to clear it? Is
there not more of the Devil seen herein, than in your former wickedness? more
Hypocrisy and Deceit? Stop your mouths you Dissemblers, the Truth will clear
it self, and in the end all shall witness it when the War is completed, and
the Beast and the false Prophet is cast into the Lake.

And in the clearing of the Truth say you, he being fully persuaded by what he
learned from the Quakers, of the Truth which was made known by the Light in us,
which Light is spiritual and guides out of the work of the flesh, to Worship
God in Spirit and Truth, he was then to wait out of thoughts and imaginations,
etc. and his Understanding being now thus opened, he was possessed with much
joy in the sense of that love he had received, whereupon he was resolved to
give all diligence that his Calling and Election may be made sure; but being
naturally of a hasty and forward mind, and his resolution in part being of a
Covenant of his own, there was speedily begot in him an extreme fiery Zeal,
so that in the general he was hastily carried forth before the true Light, by
which in a short time he became lost in his Understanding and so the Disputer
was raised to life, and that which was for Condemnation, having darkened the
Light of the Sun, formed it self in the shape of the true Light, and so deceit
got the Power, and led one of the true Obedience in the things before related,
by which the Simple became exceedingly deceived; but when he was restored by
the clear Light of Life, being guided in that obedience which was professed by
those people amongst whom he was, being the Quakers, and his witness, you say,
herein is true: To all which, I say, this being true, then out of your own
mouths be ye judged, that what you witnessed to before was a lie; For, if it
was the true Spiritual Light which first let him see his Darkness, and would
have guided him out of the works of the Flesh, his own thoughts and
imaginations; and if the cause why he turned from that was his natural hasty
forward mind and resolution, which carried him forth before the true Light,
being a Covenant of his own, and thereby darkened the Light of the Sun, and so
formed up false Lights in shape of a true Light, whereby deceit got power to do
those filthy things before related; and if he was restored again by the true
Light, being guided by that obedience which was professed by the Quakers, and
this, you say, his witness therein is true; then let all, wherein there is the
least measure of honesty, judge of your blasphemy, lies and slanders, and
abominable confusions, who all along in your Book have gone about to defile and
slander the true Light of the Spirit of God with these filthy things, which
you now confess was acted in his hasty forward mind, carried forth before the
true Light in a Covenant of his own, whereby the true Light was darkened, and
the deceit got power to act those things by which the simplicity was deceived,
which you would cast upon the persons of the Quakers: Can you behold your
confusion and not be ashamed? Is this your foot out of the Snare? and do you
not blush at your envy against the innocent? and are you not afraid at your
envy against the light? can you say and unsay, accuse and excuse, and all in
one thing, and witness all for truth? was there ever a generation of men thus
brazened in iniquity, and who could feed upon mischief like you? How long
will you make lies your refuge, and smite, the innocent in secret therevvith,
who are passing on their way peaceably? Do you believe that all are so blind
as some who are led by you, who believe all to be truths you speak in your
Pulpits without examination? Or do you think that wisdom and light is wholly
excluded from amongst men, and true judgment wholly rejected? then might you
think that your lies and deceits might pass unreproved and you cover your
selves therewith as with a garment. But the Lord is risen and rising and the
light is come, and the daie-spring from on high is visiting his people, and
your works of darkness must come to judgment; and you must know against whom
you builders are gathered, though you think it is but against the despised
people who have none to take their part in the earth. But what is the work you
have done herein, further than manifesting Herod and Pilate, your selves who
could never agree in yourworship nor opinions, now joined together to set your
hands to a lie against the Lamb and his Light, which was ever refused by you
builders; and so no strange thing is happened to the children of Light, and your
works shall tend no further then to accomplish the will of God, to keep them
blind who desire not the way of the light, because they love their deeds of
darkness, and so the just Judgment of God is upon them and you, who are given
up to bear your testimony to the Liar; for truly the least of the children of
Light who love their measure of God, with it they see you, and your gathering
together, and your ground, with the root and branch from whence you spring; you
are comprehended with the Light, your compass, with the depth of your deceit,
and your end; and the Arm of the Lord is seen gathering his sheep, which by you
have been scattered upon the barren mountains this cloudy dark day, ever since
the rise of the Pope, and his Adherents, the head and tail, stalk and branch
that from him spring: And the Lord is uttering his voice, even the
Soul-shepheard, calling by his light into his teaching and feeding, who is the
spiritual Pastor, who is no hireling nor devourer of the sheep, neither does he
make a prey upon them; who seeks the lost which you have driven away, and
restores the lame, strengthens the feeble, and carries the lambs in his bosom,
because they are his own, who does not feed upon the fat, nor make a prey upon
the poor, who does not teach for the fleece, nor seek for his gain from his
quarter, nor bear rule by his means, with force and rigor, who seeks them and
not theirs, who respects not the person but the purity; Praises, praises to him
for ever, who is now appaaring to call to an account those who have perverted
his way: And all you who have changed his worship into another thing then what
he appointed, as is plain amongst you, who have not left one particular of his
Worship, which you have not added to, and altered from what it was in himself
and his Saints, as is plain in Scripture, which will not own any one thing you
do in your high places, to be so much as in the form of true worship; but you
have formed after the times and changes of men, and some you have led with you
into the new forms, and some you have left in the old, till you have scattered
the Lords people from him, and his way; so that from the Pope to this day you
are all gone out of the way, nor is there any one form of worship in the
Nations, into which you have led them, which is in that manner (much less the
matter) in which it was before the Pope begun; and because we tell you these
things, and call you to come to the foundation of truth, we are accounted your
enemies: But behold the Lord is zealous for Zion, and is rising to gather his
outcasts, and has uttered his voice, and lift up his Standart against the
Idol-shepherds; therefore are you gathered to gether against him to war, even
the heads of all colors, and he will break you to pieces together, and scatter
you as you have scattered his Lambs, and trampled upon the Simple, and made a
prey upon him whose heart has been set to seek God, such have you drawn into
your net, and led them into your forms, and there have set your selves over
them, serving your selves upon them; these must be taken from between your
teeth, and gathered not by might nor by power, but by mine arm says the Lord.
Howl you Vine-dressers, the heir is come to call for fruit, and you are
gathering together against him, that you may keep his Vineyard as an
inheritance to your selves, who have planted therein for your selves, and not
for him, so that the Lord can have no fruit; Your Vineyard brings forth pride,
vainglorie, and respect of persons, love of the world, and conformity thereto,
creature-worships, and honor, which is not of God: this fruit abounds, and you
like it well, and plead for it, lest it should be plucked up: but the pure God
disowns this fruit, and therefore your plants he will pluck up, which bring
forth fruits to the times and not to him, not the same that is and was in his
Son: And all your worships which follow the times, and not him, that which
changes with the times must be plucked up also, that he may plant that which is
before time was, which brings not forth to your times, but unto God: this he
will accomplish, though your rage be great. Against whom are you gathered you
scornful proud ones? against a people whom the Lord has laid as the streets,
and as the ground to them that go over: Thus has the Lord made his people to
prove you, and you are found trampling upon them, and they are esteemed in your
eyes as not worthy to live. Surely had you risen up against an enemy, you
might have had honor: but you are risen up against them that are laid much
lower then the lowest of the people, who have no kindred in the earth, nor is
there any who will so far debase himself as to plead their cause; they are
sold for nothing, nor does any enquire after their blood: Surely to thee O Lord
do we look, thou art our beloved on whom we lean, at the end of the times thou
have revived us, and in thy life we shall live. Oh you Potsheards of the earth!
why will you be broken to pieces? why will not you look to the pit out of
which you were dug, before you be taken away in his Wrath: for your
gathering together is the Iron Rod prepared, and it is lifted up though you see
it not.

And as for thee John Toldervy, who so often has said to diverse people, that
thou did put forth this book to clear the truth professed by those called
Quakers, from many slanders cast upon it through thy means; now that truth by
us professed is a witness against thee for ever, that thou have not sought to
clear it, but have sought thine own, and have caused the truth to be blasphemed
above all that ever was before thee in this generation, since the time of his
appearance, who is tho Light of the world; and for that end have thou gone out
to consult with the greatest enemies to that Truth professed by us, that is in
the Nation, as the chief Priests ever was: Now to thee and them, from the
living God must it be after your work, and to all the rest who have stirred
thee up against them who have tendered thy soul, and against that Light which
let thee see thy sin, which light and truth thou and they shall confess too, at
the dreadful day, when you have finished your testimony against it, and for
your lusts, but as for us whom the thing is intended against, we desire none of
the evil may come upon you, God is our witness, yet do we know his word is
true, who has said, It is meet that offenses must come, but woe to that man by
whom they do come, it had been good he had not been born. So as thou goes
toward the Pit, remember what is said, and so to you all, and let that of God
in all your consciences (which you have reproached) be my witness herein,
against you all who set this work on foot.

If this man gainsaid, and turned into fables and believed lies, truth
changes not, and the Priests make him their refuge, as they heretofore did
Judas: Was he brought to see his sins, and yet heard nothing of the mystery
of the Gospel? and is he given over to believe lies, and to gainsay the truth?
Did Cain hear the voice of God, and yet slew Abel his brother? Did Core come
out of Egypt, and yet did he gainsay? Do not thou think to perish in his
gainsaying that art ungodly? But thy, and your spirits the Lord rebuke, for
your spirits are favored and tried, and your voice is known, and your mist
does no hurt among the children of Light, nor your smoke, for the Sun is risen,
and all the barking of the dogs of Egypt against the lambs, them does not fear;
the true shepherd is among his sheep, who puts them forth, and goes before
them, and they know his voice and follow him, and he gives them eternal life. I
am the light of the world, and inlighten every one in the world; so you who do
hate the light, as you manifest, in the day of your condemnation remember

Therefore an exhortation to all friends, The Light which Christ lights every
man withal, which comes from Christ the unchangeable Priest, this light lets
you see the end of all shadows, visions, and the end of the first Priesthood,
and all types and figures, and guides, out of all changeable things, to the
unchangeable priest from whence light comes to him by whom the world was made,
from all lying signs and wonders, from all the inventions of the brain, from
the feigned humility, from the will worship, and all hypocrisy, and thoughts
and imaginations of man's heart, which is desperately wicked, and hastiness, and
foolishness, and inventions, and the desires of man's own will and lusts to
Christ, who is the wisdom of God, to receive the wisdom with it, to be
ordered to the glory of God: and here the everlasting Covenant of Life, of
Light, of peace, is witnessed who believes in the light, makes not have, for
the light manifests all that is contrary whatsoever; here is the true
humility known, the true patience that obtains the Crown, and the willing and
the running kept down; which the Light manifests, which from Christ does
come, to whom all power in heaven and earth is given, which from him does come,
with which light the throne of grace is seen, by which you are saved from the
wonders of the Beast, and the lies of the false Prophet, which the world runs
after.

FINIS.

