Proh Tempora! Proh Mores! Or an unfeigned CAVEAT TO ALL True Protestants, Not
in any case to touch any of these three Serpents;

Viz. Mr Erbery's Babe of Glory. The Mad-mans Plea, AND Mr. Christopher Feakes
Exhortations.


Whose Language is infectious, and whose stings are mortiferous, therefore of
all Gods people to be shunned, as those which intend nothing more then
Christian persecution.

Written by J. N. a Mechanic.

2 Thessalonians. 3.6. We warn you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that
you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinately, and not
after the instruction that he receives of us.

London, Printed by T. N. 1654.

Proh Tempora! Proh Mores! Or An unfeigned Caveat to all true Protestants, not
in any case to touch any of these three Serpents: Mr Erbery's Babe of Glory,
The Mad man's Plea And Mr Christopher Feaks Exhortations.
IN this short Discourse, I shall not lay open to public view the summum
totale of Mr. Erbery's painted Jezabel, nor so to mention it word by word in
way of an Answer, if so, I might find enough of his combustible matter to fill
a large Volume, and that for these two Reasons.

First, Because the chiefest matter therein contained, is only what he has
often expressed at Sommerset house in the Strand by word of mouth, in the
hearing of many of my friends, and now he cries, Cur non liceret scribere, si
licet effari, so that where his breath cannot reach, his sting shall.

But secondly, Because he has in his book neither head nor foot, but only a
rabble of news from North Wales, brought to London by a seduced Disciple, I
know not wherein I can piece one whole sentence worth an Answer; and for this
cause I shall only speak generally concerning Mr. Erberys book styled, The
Babe of Glory.

And first for the Title of his book, I do conceive according to their grand
Ordinance, Except ye be rebaptized, you cannot enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, upon this account of theirs, I hold it my duty to new name this Babe,
and as I suppose it is the Babe of Antichrist, or the dawning of the false
Prophets springing forth out of North Wales, and extending to the utmost cape
of its continent, generally termed the four corners of the earth; (but blessed
be God) that he does not draw all men after him, I am bold that it is but yet a
little while and those that see as it were in a glass, shall see clearly the
duration of these men to be but for a moment, the devil may prevail long with
men whilst he is in an Angels clothing, but this is sure, he shall not continue
long, but Christians may see his mutability and his subtle wiles wherewith
many are led captive.

Mr Erbery tells us of our becoming so like unto God, as that we shall not know
how to commit sin, and of our super-glorious condition, even in this life, for
my part, I sear the continuance of it, and therefore to show you their sainting
in their unheard of Principles, I shall speak the truth and shame that spirit
which is shameless in the hearts of many of them; therefore I do affirm, and
nor unwillingly, but as I must appear before God, that a man may pray
eloquently, expound Scripture after the manner of Apostles, and sooth his
hearers with his sugared and Antinomical tongue, (for in general, men and women
do delight to live under such a Ministry as is all for Faith and no Works) men
do rather affect to hear of King Jesus, then of Jesus Christ in all his
Offices, I say a man may do all this as we say, (...) and yet want true Grace;
I do desire that those which read this expression may admire and wonder at it,
even unto astonishment; now experience is the best teacher, which experience
although at certain times grievous to consider, yet in time has produced such
good effects as Patience and Hope, which Hope makes me not ashamed of the
truth, but to grow as it were in an Ecstasy, and be amazed that I should be
received to mercy. Indeed the Lord for reasons best known to himself, does
suffer you to increase and to go on in your way of seducing, perhaps for the
trial of our Faith, and on the other side as the saying is, the higher you are
gained, the likelyer to fall, ut lapsu graviore ruatis, but take it from me,
there is no surer discerner of an hypocrite, then by his non-perseverance in
that good and true way which he so much pretended for, but it is he, and he
only that endures to the end that shall be saved. Let Mr. Erbery but consider
well of that Scripture in Jam. 1.8. and that also in. Rev. 22.18, 19. and I am
confident for the first, he is the very Idea of a weathercock, and the proper
subject to whom that verse does relate; and so for the other it would amaze any
man that reads his book, to see what addition here, and what diminution there,
what mangling and barbarous dissecting he makes of the holy and divine Oracles,
but I will let him cease because I do not now intend Polugraphy, and therefore
you that read this may have a great care of a Pamphlet styled, The Mad man's
Plea, whom I suppose to be more Knave then Fool; My friends, he that touches
pitch will be defiled, it may be if you once go to hear these men (for I know
that people were never more curious then now) I say perhaps because of the
sweetness of their Syrenlike voice, you may be enticed to go again, and chiefly
because you are not as they say, come to Mount- Sinai* where you shall hear the
Law with its terrible voice, like John's preaching in a rough garment, but unto
their Mount- Sion, where you are past Law and the true Ordinances of Jesus
Christ administered in its right form and method, let me tell you that separate
your selves in this age from the true way and manner of hearing the Word, that
there is many of you have fallen very foully and scandalously, for all your
smooth and glossy tongue, I could name some of you that did gain as many
followers in that time of your excelling hypocrisy, as that Sorcerer Theudas
did Jews by his specious pretenses; but I could be more comforted to hear you
lay it open your selves, even in your public Assemblies and Meeting Houses,
you do in a great measure derogate from that heavenly Apostle of whom you make
often mention, concerning his dis-esteem, and his undervaluing of learning, if
you do remember Scripture so well, as you commonly have it at your fingers end,
and something more by this then ordinary, in making of this sin, when we call
the days of the week after Heathen names, much forgetting if that had been sin,
St. Paul would rather have omitted the ships name that carried him that
dangerous voyage, then to have used this new found sinful expression, whose
sign was Castor and Pollux, but to omit this, I say, if you take notice, this
said Apostle in all his Epistles, does never conceal his former arrogance, his
massacring the Saints and servants of the most high, but where ever he did come
he was very apt to say, I am that Saul the persecutor, and did once study
earnestly to commit this kind of murder, and that with fervent zeal, which
words were no otherwise spoken, but only that he might add more splendour to
the exceeding love of God in Christ, which makes him to cry out with great
admiration, that I Paul should be received to Mercy; that showed no Mercy; this
did therefore cause him to give greater diligence, this makes him to be more
zealous and fervent for Jesus Christ his master and Lord, then ever any before
him or after him; this makes Paul not only love the brethren, but to lust
speedily after the conversion of others wherever he sojourned: but my friends
that style your selves mad men, only in an upbraiding way; to you I say thus
much, that you are so far from Paul's mind and do so much slight that Scripture
in Jam. 5.16. as that you do act clean contrary, and speak contrary, only as
you say in despite of the Papism, and that because the Papists from that
Scripture do use so much confession before men, and one man to another,
therefore you do use the less before God, and for the most part in your
Prayers, you talk proudly with God, in a fashion more mandatorilike then
supplicatory, as if so be God was but your equal makes you in your Orisons say,
Lord thou must do this thing for us, and thou must make our State to cause
their ships and men, and that very suddenly, to go and bring away home with
them the new Roman King, and when that is done, they bid the Lord not to suffer
the ships to lie by the walls, but in the next place to sail up the Straits with
the next wind, and so to Rome, which is mystical Babylon, etc. Indeed the three
things which do chiefly stick in these men's throats are these: Learned
Ministers, Infant Baptism, and singing of Psalms amongst the mixed multitude;
And first for our Ministers, the mad knave calls them Baals Priests, idle
shepherds, Dumb dogs, lazy Sir John's, etc. all which Titles Mr. Feake that Arch
Prophet of our times does greatly affect and approve of, as I shall declare, as
if so be, because learned, they were not capable of the Spirit; now let me tell
such carping momusses, that Grace is adorned and beautifyed by Learning, and
more then this, God does usually send that blessing of blessings, even the
spirit of Prayer, and teaching, to accompany that sincere and pious care which
many Parents take in the virtuous education of their children, which because
many of you want, do therefore possess strong delusions; I ask any of you
whether the Spirit of God did teach you to read English? I deny not but that
some men may have much humane Learning, and yet want that Spirit that you so
much boast of, and does it therefore follow that they are all so? 2ly, Remember
your own congregational baseness, and great relapses of your own members, who
when God has brought some of them out of your extraordinary, and your
supernatural liberty, it has rejoiced me to hear them with such vehement
detestings of your profaneness and instability, even in all your ways, near
upon resting, and yet never at rest in your bye judgments, I believe that
there is a spirit of madness reigning in many men, you say you need no Priest,
because you are all taught of God, and you are above common Ordinances, as
hearing public Prayers, and public Preaching, which last one of your Sect
told me that they could all do as well as the Priests; nay better, for says
he, they are fain to study for it, and that was a sign they knew not, neither
were acquainted with the spirit of God, for we says he, having God within us,
are able to preach (or rather seduce) ex tempore at any time, though I fear
that there is few of you that have true fellowship with the Father or his Son
Jesus Christ, this being another reason as I conceive, because you are so
seated in your most unholy and unstable Faith, as that you will not be
convinced by Argument, these are ill signs that you worship no God but your
own fearless and hopeless Creed. Ah my friends, when any of us come to this
pass, to have a low esteem of Ministers and the standing Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, and to make sin of that which is no sin, of this sort is that of
breaking bread amongst the known and unknown people, when as none more vile in
the sight of a pure God then themselves, these are your time-servers, Stand by
(with the Pharisee) for I am holier then thou, but the Apostles never used any
such needless curiousity; and for my part, if I may lay down mine opinion in
this matter, it is thus: that when the devil that crafty observer of the
overtures in States and Kingdoms, did find that all his labor and pains were
in vain, whereby he thought to have erected Popery here amongst us in England,
and seeing that all his Machiavel plots were discovered by some of those that
love the Truth and Peace, he then according to his ancient Fox-like policy
causes breaches and rents to be made in the Church, whereby some false
brethren do impede as much as in them lies, the standing and permanent
Ordinances of our Lord, now remaining in all Protestant Churches, for if
Athanasius want a persecuting Emperor, yet without doubt he shall not want a
false brother, which Arrius by his external writings, and plausible Arguments
to the then present Government, did get into the great men's affections, even
then when true and faithful Athanasius together with his Nicene Creed, were
banished exiles into a remote Country, now I say, when the heat of the Tyrants
cruelty was in some kind abated, yet the devil was not idle nor weary of his
torturing the christians, but did work so craftily by that Arrian heresy, that
Athanasius and the rest of the sincere Christians were never so molested and
tossed by the Tyrants, then they were by such kind of schismatics, yet this
is the associate of a true christian, that for all this he was that persevering
Athanasius, when his enemies were ashamed at the ignominious downfall of their
chieftain Arrius: like unto Daniel without worldly comfort, and yet Daniel
still; so I am confident the faithful Ministers of this Land although
reproached, and emulated, and persecuted yet they will be Ministers still, in
despite of all opponents.

But the second thing they carp at is Infant Baptism, which an Anabaptist as he
calls himself, or as I call him an Antibaptist, being more proper to their
profession, did suppose at a meeting in Warwick shire to have quite overthrown
that Ordinance, and thereupon some of their Synagogue did presently set forth a
book called Baby-Baptism routed, let any one judge of the rout, being not half
so big as that rout which the Miller of Bynley made amongst some of their
fellow creatures when he found them Denudated, laving and defiling his
christalline torrent with an unheard of custom, and let me tell you, this does
add to your Religion more contempt, because that although you have gotten head
amongst us in England, and a meeting place allowed you to exercise your selves
in, yet you are not herewith content, but do devise to through down al
Religion, save that which bears your mark in the front of it, and to bring all
Learning in subjection to your proud and scoffing Wills, chiefly inveighing
against the Blackcoats; in my weak opinion a vesture more beseeming the Leaders
of people, then a cloak trimmed with Gold Buttons, but I do with confidence
aver, that although these people have as much power and prevalency in England,
as Arrius had in the East; you will fall with the self same descent as your
predecessors have done before you, and if you do intend seeing you cannot
dissolve the ordinances which we must retain. I will only write this sentence
concerning this matter, for your own proper admonition, that except you do
devise some safer and more facetious stratagem in that external ordinance of
wading, then was used to an old Marron in Warwick shire some years since (as I
suppose not unknow to prophet Erbery) being to the utter loss of that daily use
that before she had with her limbs (the waters so benumbing her) I say if this
be not altered, you will have but few Disciples, and did I grant to you that
our manner of Baptism was only an Ordinance instituted by men (believing with
the Apostle, that neither circumsion nor uncircumcision avail any thing, except
a new creature) I conceive you ought to submit to it for conscience sake.

Now for singing of Psalms, I mean that which Mr. Feake derides; I am
confident, that for all their scoffs; as when I have come to Christ Church,
only in contempt of the Ordinance. I have beheld a great part of the people to
sit with their hats on in a deriding posture: This it seems is one of Mr.
Christopher Feake's Exhortations, and indeed is it not a comely one, when I
compare it with that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.24. Paul was of that heavenly
condiscending temper, that if by eating meat his brother was offended, he would
never eat meat more. And does Mr. Feake think that this hat-waring and laughing
(at our howling as they call it) does not offend us that sing. Let them look to
it, for the words are plain, Yea in so doing sin against Christ.

But, 2. Mr. Feake does exhort them, and stir them up to sing that new song of
the Lamb, they now being upon mount Zion; and to that intent the Spirit of God
having taught it him, he song it, together with the Congregation; but such was
his Semi-Reformation, or deformation, that when he had compiled his Hymn of
praise, He was fain to make use of one of our Prelatical Tunes (as they call
them) a thing that as I thought did much derogate from that spirit which was
present with him at the peaning of them. You say old things and relics are
past and out of date, and you will make all things new if you can; you will
reform and you will not, you cannot tell what you would have your selves, only
Mahomet-like, who though he hate Judaisme, yet commands that all Musselmen be
circumcised, being no other then a crafty wile that the devil did infuse into
the mind of Sergius that wicked Alcoran-founder, knowing that it would make
their Faith and their Religion more accepted amongst men. So though our leaders
make new songs, they either will not or cannot make new tunes, but will have
our Quiresters tune, though they say it does relish of the beast, being only
for this cause, that the people may relish their novelties with the greater
affectation. Augustine says, Quomodo debite potest Deo psallere, qui ignarat
quid psallat? So how can we praise God as we ought to do, when we cannot
understand your strange notions, but our old w^y of singing the Psalms of
David are not strange nor irksome to us; and therefore we are able to bless and
praise God, and that knowingly and sencibly of his great mercies toward us; but
if I remember my own former reproof to you, it may be a matter of offense in
the eyes of Mr. Feake, who accounts of the Fathers and their knowledge, as to
base and sordid an element, for to be the subject of his Metaphysical and most
capacious fancy. He says indeed when he was a child he minded such childish
things as the perusing of Antiquaries, but now he says, Ego non sum ege, or
else he is transplanted sure into another Region: he says naught save the
Bible. I fear he did forget the Kentish Prophets book of Navigation, which the
laid Prophet affirms will be of like duration. But indeed if Mr. Feake do
remember that when he went to School, they had an expression which remains
firm and inviolable even to this day, amongst those that he calls Sir Jehus,
and that is this, Satis est quod suffocat: and truly I do believe, that in
that eternal and divine Scripture, He with the rest of his followers which are
so resolutely bent to trample down humane Learning, may meet with matter
enough, not only to satisfy and silence all such curious novations as those,
which cast a scandal upon all such Ministers as will prefer Learning before
unstable Doctrines, but also to choke and mortify all confident, and overwise
turn-coats. Such is the stupidity of this deplorable age, that if people were
not blind, they might see Antichrist in colors, even in our own country; for
do not we see these men that do pretend great and supernatural gifts, to preach
nothing more then that which may set us all together by the ears: is any thing
more rife in their expressions then the convenience of our dissentions, and
upon this account they do much wrong that Scripture where it is said, That
offenses shall come. Is not their vain glory seen in this which they only
adhibite to themselves, as a token of their specialty, and singularity from the
mixed multitude in their private conventicles? Is not the major part of Mr.
Feakes praying and preaching taken up in the encouragement of the hearers, to
go first to the skirts and borders of Italy, which they say are the friends of
the great whore; so that there may be none left to way-lay; or like the
Banditi, to resist Mr. Feake in his way to Rome; and above all this, is not
this admirable and terrifying their Job-like patience, that men do not
Apostles-like, leave all and do what they bid them do; But shall I tell my
brethren according to the flesh, that as our proverb is, Rome was not built in
one day; so to this day amongst those forlorn Greeks that yet remain, they
have a Proverb, that Greece lost but one eye in one day; fair and softly is the
wisemans steps. For my part let these men be so quick as they will or can, I do
seriously believe that this present Pope Innocent the tenth, being a man of
very old age, will be gathered to his Fathers, before Mr. Feake or any of his
stout intenders shall arive at the sweet river Po; and therefore I do conceive
that his rigid expressions are nothing, except unsound resolutions without
Christian deliberation, Saint Paul says, Covet to prophecy, but forbid not to
speak with tongues; it is thus in the Greek (...); and this hold forth by it
conjunction copulative, that the tongues are a great help unto prophecy, much
less a disgrace, as they say, and do most commonly accompany each other, then
the word Forbid I find to signify, not to impede, nor to cast dirt in the
faces of a Minister, because he is a good Scholar, so that he which is past or
above our ancient writers, I fear he is past grace. I may truly think this, for
when I see men strive to rent us in pieces by upbraiding our teachers, and
casting vile aspersions upon them, it is an ill sign of true brethren, else
why can they not like the Apostles become all unto all men, that they might
gain the more; it makes me to cry with the Father, of an accursed toleration,
but I hope that God will show these men their folly, and what heavy judgments
this their separation may produce. Oh, when shall we be one sheepfold, under
that only great Shepherd Jesus Christ, even before the Lords bow is bent
against us; and in my weak judgment, I do rather fear the Atheism of the
heathens, then the Papism of Rome to overwhelm us, least God remove our
Candlestick, because of our ingratitude, that although we possess the great
means of salvation, yet we are murmurers, deceivers, and yet being deceived.
And I will say thus much to those that are zealous in a good cause and in a
sound Religion, I say let this keep up your spirits, and make you stick close
unto the public Ordinances; Because, first, This is no new thing to meet with
false brethren. And secondly, because it is but for a moment that your trial
shall last: now although the primitive Christians endured above ten years
persecution under the Emperors, yet it was but a little while in their esteem,
which made the Father to cry out, Isthoc nobile vincendi genus patientia est;
it must be with much patience that you shall possess your souls; and therefore
have a care to your steps, always bearing in your minds this remembrance of
Asias former glory, and her present doleful estate, wherein she now remains,
as also what dreadful wars and famine were effected in the Low-countrys, only
by the sedition of such like men as now rail against all Religion save thein
own, which I am sure is much defiled.

FINIS.

