Interest will not Lie. Or, a View of ENGLAND'S True Interest:

In reference to the PAPIST, ROYALIST, PRESBYTERIAN, BAPTIZED, NEUTER, ARMY,
PARLIAMENT, City of LONDON.


In refutation of a treasonable Pamphlet, entitled, The Interest of England
stated.

Wherein the Author of it pretends to discover a way, how to satisfy all
Parties beforementioned, and provide for the Public Good, by calling in the
Son of the late King, etc.

Against whom it is here proved, That it is really the Interest of every Party
(except only the Papist) to keep him out: And whatever has been objected by
Mr. William Pryn, or other Malcontents, in order to the restoring of that
Family, or against the legality of this Parliament's sitting, is here answered
by Arguments drawn from Mr Baxter's late Book called A Holy Commonwealth, for
the satisfaction of them of the Presbyterian way; and from Writings of the most
learned Royalists, to convince those of the Royal Party.

By MAR. NEDHAM.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, dwelling over against Bainards-Castle in
Thames Street. 1659.

Interest will not lie: Or, A View of ENGLAND'S True Interest, etc.
The Preamble.
IT is a Maxim among Politicians, That Interest will not lie: Which prudential
saying has a twofold sense, the improving whereof is very useful to a man,
either in the conduct of his own Affairs, or in discerning the conduct and end
of the Affairs and enterprises of other men. One sense of it may be this; That
if you can apprehend wherein a man's Interest to any particular Game on foot
does consist, you may surely know, if the man be prudent, whereabout to have
him, that is, how to judge of his design: For, which way soever you foresee
his Interest does in prudence dispose him, that way (provided he be so wise as
to understand his own Concernment) he will be sure to go, and so his Interest
(provided also, that in your calculation thereof you be not mistaken) will not
lie to you, it will not deceive you in your judgment concerning the man's
Intents and Proceedings.

The other sense of that Maxim is, That if a man state his own Interest aright,
and keep close to it, it will not lie to him or deceive him, in the prosecution
of his Aims and ends of Good unto himself, nor suffer him to be missed or drawn
aside by specious pretenses; to serve the ends and purposes of other men.

This being so, and Designs being now generally laid to engage the People a new
in blood and confusion, and this fawning Pamphlet having for the same cause
been dispersed throughout the Three Nations, it was necessary for the right
information of our Countrymen of all Parties, to give them a view of their true
Interests, for fear lest by this and the other treasonable Papers which fly up
and down, or through the sly insinuations and persuasions of cunning men, any
one Party should happen to be seduced from a right understanding of their
Interest at such a time as this, and imbarque themselves for the Interest of a
Public Enemy, upon supposition of attaining thereby their own and the Public
welfare: Therefore give me leave to trace and overtake the Deceiver (I mean
this Author) in his own Method; in the prosecution whereof I shall endeavor to
manifest, That as it is a main Point of Interest among the Grandee-Cavaliers
both here and beyond sea, by spreading Libels, false Rumors, fair Promises*
subtle Arguments of Persuasion, and all other ways imaginable, to rub men's
discontents, and bewitch their senses, that they may not be able to discern
their own Concernments; So, on the other side, We who are the People, of all
Parties, considering that those Cavalier-Grandees are concerned to draw us in
(if they can) to do their drudgery in War at the hazard of our Necks, ought to
conceive it a principal part of our Interest to understand theirs and not to
suffer our selves to be trepanned by fine pretenses and devices, to venture our
own bloods, and shed the blood of others, for the erecting of their greatness
upon our own particular and the general Ruin. -- And because this Author says
one thing well, That the real go^d of the Nation consists not in the private
benefit of single men, but the advantage of the Publi^k and that it is made up,
not by the welfare of any one Party, but of all; Therefore when I have made it
appear, by scanning the Interests and Concernments of all Parties among us,
that no one party, no, not the Royalists themselves (except only the Papist)
can hope for any good by the restitution of Charles Stuart, but must necessarily
partake in the common calamity as well as others, then I suppose the Conclusion
will naturally follow: That it is the Interest of all to keep him out.

SECTION I.
Of the Papist, whom our Author calls by the more splendid name of Roman
Catholic.

HIs words are these. [ It Is the Interest of the Roman Catholics to bring in
the King; for by that means the heavy paiments now on their estates, with other
burdens, will be taken off: And as to the pressures of Penal Laws, they cannot
but remember how far from grievous they were in the late Kings time, the
Catholics living, here notwithstanding them, in more flourishing condition
than those of France, Italy, or Spain did, under their respective Princes; and
would do infinitely more under their natural King, than if any Foreiner should
acquire the Power by Conquest: Besides, they generally having adhered to the
late King in his Wars, have no reason to distrust a favorable treatment from
his Son.

It Is well done of our Author to speak out; and what he says, we will easily
grant: for the Papists cannot deny their own Interest so far as not to endeavor
by all means imaginable to restore the Son, who has made as fair professions
to the Pope as ever the Father did, and no doubt he would (were he restored) as
really perform them. We cannot forget what Transactions passed betwixt his
Father and the Court of Rome, at the time of his being in Spain, and what a
Letter of assurance he then wrote to his Holiness; nor how both the Father and
Grandfather betrayed the Protestan: Cause in Germany* France, and all over the
world; and how that to make way for Popery, Superstition was countenanced,
Papists preferred to greatest places of Trust, and were in greatest credit at
Court, while the best sort of Professors were forced to quite the Nation, and
retire into wildernesses in another world: But to encourage Papists, they (as
our Author says) had all burdens taken away from them, and lived here in a
more flourishing condition than those of France, Italy, or Spain, did in their
own countries. He does well also to remember us, how close they stuck to the
late King in his wars; and we cannot forget that they had reason, considering
how close he stuck to them. They know how it came about, that some Hundred
thousands of Protestants were by unheard of and most inhumane butcheries
offered up in sacrifice to the grand Idol of the Popish Interest in Ireland;
and all the world knows, the Papists had and openly declared and showed they
had, a Commission for what they did there, and that it was transmitted thither
under the great Seal of Scotland, yea and every one knows or has heard, who
was in person there at the time of its issuing forth, and had custody of the
Seal of that Kingdom in his own hands. And after those barbarous Rebels of
Ireland had in cruelty out-acted all the Monsters of former Ages, my Lord of
Ormond can tell you, who it was that did as openly own them for what they had
done, and solicited them to send six thousand of those Vilans into England
against the Parliament, and Supplies into Scotland, and empowered him the said
Ormond to give them all manner of Assurances, save only that he would not yield
they should have liberty of making Appeals to Rome, because it would have
entrenched upon his Regal interest and prerogative: but as for the interest and
honor of God and Religion, that he let go, and sent particular Thanks to Brown
Muskerry and Plunket, defperate Rebels) for their good services who had been
the chief Actors in that horrid Massacre. And if Ormond will not acknowledge
these things, it is well we have the Letters to produce which were written to
him by that Royal hand, and found in his Cabinet taken at the Battle of Naisby.

The Papists therefore having had so fair a Creature of the Father, we shall
yield likewise (for many reasons) that they have no cause to fear foul dealing
from the Son; a Gentleman of as good a nature toward them as the Sire was!
For, they ought not to forget, and they of the Scottish Nation cannot choose but
with sorrow remember, what a woeful Convert they had of him, when being after
his Father's death in the Isle of Jersey they invited him out of the very arms
(as I may say) of the Irish Rebels, among whom he was then ready to go, having
struck up a Bargain with them, and sent his goods beforehand by sea to Kinsale,
with intent immediately to have followed them As for his Religion (if any) it is
at best, you know, but a devotion to Prelacy (which was bequeathed to him in
Legacy) for, he forfeited all his Coronation Oaths and Protestations to the
Scots Nation, with all his other pretenses of Religion there, before ever he
left that Country. What profession he has since owned abroad, has (for Reason
of tate) been kept very close, and yet not so close, but he discovered it, when
visiting one of the English Jesuits Colleges in Flanders, the showing him in
their Chapel the Essigies of several good Fathers of that house which had been
Sainted at Tyborne, he pulled his Hat over his eyes, and turned aside to the
Wall. But if this be not evident, let us have recourse to reason, and then
consider how long he was under the wing of his Mothers Instructions in France,
and what a Nursery Flande^s has been for him since, which is the most Jesuited
place in the World; consider also the urgency of his necessities disposing him
to embrace any thing, or take any course to get a Crown, being under the same
influence of that wandering Star called Ragione di Stato, as was his
Grandfather Henry the Fourth of France, who shifted his Religion to secure a
Crown, and chose rather to h^zard his portion in Paradise, than his Palace in
Paris (which some say were his own very words;) but to these considerations
take along with you the young Man's intercourse with, obligation to* dependence
upon foreign Priests and Papists; his frequent known applications and promises
to the Pope by special Agents employed to Rome for that purpose, and to the
Emperor, as well as the Spaniard: his Alliance to, and combination with him and
other Popish Princes (especially those of the Austrian party) being put
altogether into the balance, are ground enough to believe him sufficiently
affected, if not sworn to Popery. -- These things (we say) being considered, we
are easily of the same opinion with our Author: That it is absolutely the
interest of the Roman Catholic party to restore him, and see him settled in
that absolute domination over England, which was the grand project of the
Court, and for the attaining whereof, his Father first laid the foundation of
our Civil Wars. Which being evidently the true interest of the Papists in
respect to him, we cannot be-lie them, when we say, It is that which they and
their foreign Friends do make their great business to bring about, and so we
know where to have them; on the other side* seeing that in reverence to the
principles and practices, both of his Father and Mother, and in respect to the
Obligations he has to the whole Popish party for his Bread, he is concerned to
retain them as the best and surest Friends (and the old Friends) of his Family,
we do not be-lie him, if we conclude, that no party in England can expect any
other thing by his restitution, but that they all must be always truckling
under the Papist, to the extreme hazard of the Reformed Religion professed now
with all freedom here among us; so that we should absolutely be-lie our own
Interest, and deceive our selves, if we would (which God forbid) give ear to
the Royal Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

SECT. II.
Of the Royalist.

OUr Authors words are these: [ The Royalist and English Protestant, besides
that his Principles oblige him cheerfully to pay his obedience where it is due,
and look no further, is likewise by his Interest concerned to be content with
such a restitution of the King, as allows no private reparations for past
sufferings, they thereby acquiring full possession of what remains; and as the
settlement of the Nation would make the smallest estate more advantageous than
the greatest would be, acquired by violence, which unavoidably would defeat all
terms of Union, and involve the Nation in new Wars; so likewise, if the
necessary parts of their way of worship be secured, other circumstantial things
will be easily settled by a fair and amicable Treaty.]

Before we proceed, let us animadvert a little upon particular expressions in
this Paragraph. By his joining the word Royalist and English Protestants, he
intimates, as if none were good Protestants-but Royalists: and truly this is
generally the fantasy of that party, who look upon all others with an evil
eye, as Heretics and Schismatics.

And whereas he says, The Royalists principles oblige him cheerfully to pay
obedience where it is due, this touches upon a new question, intimating that
he owes not obedience to the present power, which doctrine, having been hotly
banded heretofore, this is no place to dispute about, and therefore I refer the
Reader to another piece, which will shortly come forth, one part whereof
will-be to confirm the point of Subjection, though the dueness thereof to the
present Powers has been formerly proved, both by reason* and by testimonies
drawn from the most eminent Penmen of all parties, whereby all Objections (as
to our present case) have been abundantly answered.

Another expression is, That an estate acquired by violence, will unavoidably
defeat all terms of Union, and involve the Nation in new Wars. If so, then by
telling the people so, he spoils the design of his Pamphlet which is to raise
the Country; for, what man will be so mad as to run into arms, by violence to
instate Charles Stuart? seeing by consequence it would (as our Author foretells)
sow everlasting seeds of disunion and civil War among us? It is plain enough to
be foreseen, and it concerns us to believe the Gentleman, rather than make the
experiment.

Another word is, Necessary parts of Worship; these he would have secured, and
what the Royalist esteems necessary in matter of worship, we all know, even
nothing less than the old Prelatick H^erarchy with all its dependants; and the
question then is, Whether in conclusion, the Episcopal Lands and Revenues would
not after a short space be required* as the principal medium for the
maintenance of that worship. In the mean while, he a little after does as good
as tell us, that the old Church Government must be resetled.

The last expression which we take notice of, does concern the Royalist
himself, who is told that in the restitution of the Stuarts. He is not to look
for any reparations for past sufferings; and truly herein he may believe our
Author upon his word, without an Oath, or long discourse to convince him:
However, because the poor Royalist hopes to reap a great harvest by the Regal
Restitution, it will not be amiss to give him a little ^ye-salve, that he may
be able more clearly to disce^n his own condition.

The Royalists are of two sorts, first* such as adhere to Charles out of
necessity; secondly, such as adhere to him out of humor. The former are those,
who being hopeless of a return, or of the recovery of their Fortunes by way of
reconcilement, are constrained to run any hazard abroad with the head of their
party; and therefore would turn every stone to over-turn the present power of
the Commonwealth* that they may set up themselves. The latter sort of Royalists
are such, who though they served heretofore under the Royal Standard, yet
through favor of the Parliament have regained possession of their Estates, and
equal immunities with the rest of the people save only that they are not yet
thought capable of public Trusts in great Offices, or to sit in Parliament,
but otherwise they enjoy the full benefit of that Oblivion which the Parliament
gave; in hope thereby to oblige them. These may (not improperly) be called
humorous Royalists, because they have only an obstinate and vainglorious humor
for the ground of their behavior, without any possibility of advantage thereby
unto themselves, but are ridden by the other sort, to carry on the Highboy
design of particular persons. These, to restore the single Family of a Prince,
cast out by a wonderful hand of providence, seem willing to hazard the ruin of
all their own Families, and to serve the ends of certain persons about him (men
whose fortunes are desperate) they are ready to fool themselves into a loss of
their own, as certainly they will, if Charles miscarry in his enterprise,
whereas on the other side* if he should carry it with success, they will be
then but where they were, they can be but masters of what they have already;
for, this Trumpet to Rebellion has already proclaimed it in his Pamphlet, That
they must not l^ok for reparations for past sufferings* and so though they
should help to restore him, yet they must not expect to mend their Fortunes.
The High-Rantors and Fugitives are they that shall be looked on at Court, those
Bell-weathers of Royalty will bear away the Bell of preferment, whilst the poor
Country Royalists (both Gentry and Yeomen) shall be glad to drudge and plow, to
pay the yet unknown Taxations which must needs be established to satisfy the
Forlorn Brethren of the Sword, and the Grandees of the party, and finally be
entailed upon the whole English posterity, to maintain the pomp and pride of a
luxurious Court, and an absolute Tyranny. Which being considered, it is a
wonder to see how they feed themselves with phantsies, who pretend to his
restoration, supposing that the golden Age must needs return again with him,
whereas (alas!) they will be but made use of as the Cat's paw was, to pick the
chestnuts out of the fire for the service of the Monkey. This being so, and
seeing they have beforehand been told so in print by this Royal Advocate,
certainly we may conclude, it is the true Interest of the great Body of those,
who please themselves with the repute of Royalists in this Nation, by all means
to leave the High-boys and Fugitives to themselves, and avoid those
Insinuations which are contrived by them, and preached by their Clergy, to
draw them into Rebellion, and from thence into the net of new Compositions, or
rather total Confiscations. They cannot but remember, how signally God has
blasted that Family, and all their Insurrections, from time to time I Put case
they should be so mad as to stir again, yet what can be done by unweildy Bodies
of raw men, taken from the streets, the Alehouse, the Plough and the Harrow,
rude and unacquainted with Military discipline, against a well-disciplined Army
of old Soldiers? Remember what became of those vast numbers Anno 1648. in Kent
and Essex, etc. how quickly they flockt together like sheep, yet when upon the
advance of our Soldiery, they saw there was danger of being had to the
slaughter, with the same quickness they dispersed themselves, and after a weeks
airing* found it was their Interest, and the wisest way to return to their Beef
and Bacon. And if the Gentlemen Royalists should venture to make another
experiment with them, what can they in reason expect in the end, but an
execution of the Law upon their persons, and the destruction of their families?
Such broken reeds as popular Commotions, if ye lean upon them, it is a thousand
to one but they fail you; consult Histories, and you shall always find it so;
whereas if ye mind your true Interest, that will neither fail you, nor deceive
you. The Royalists (we know) are persons generally so ingenuous as to
understand that every man has a little Commonwealth within himself, and that
the Affairs thereof he is naturally obliged to look unto, by virtue of that
duty which he owes to himself and his near Relations; and they cannot but know
likewise, that if the great Commonwealth or Body politic happen by Providence
to be established in a new form otherwise then they think it should be, as it
is in such a case but folly to imbroil their Country, and engage all that is
dear to them for the old form, which is in it self a mere shadow, and like a
shadow gone away; so it is but vain for them to scruple a submission, or
adherence to the new, upon pretense of obligations to the old by Oath, because
all Casuists who write touching Cases of Conscience, yea, their own Doctor
Sanderson (a most learned man) in his Book de Juramento, will tell them, that
if they find a Government altered, and another power in possession of it, they,
being private men, are bound to submit to the present Powers, because ordained
of God (for such the Apostle has declared all Powers in being whatsoever to
be) and that the former Government ceasing, which was the object of obedience,
the Obligation thereunto must of necessity cease likewise, whatever Mr. Pryn
prattles to the contrary: For, no man can be concerned in any respect or
relation to that which is not; and so when a thing cannot be done, the
Obligation to it must needs be void (as their Doctor says) Ex Impossibilitate
Facti. It Is high time then for them to lay aside discontents and frivolous
pretenses; and to observe their true Interest, as persons conscientiously
concerned to do it, in respect to all manner of Relations both private and
public; This is the way to secure themselves in their possessions, and after
they have manifested repentance of pasts Follies, to introduce them into an
equal participation of Priviledge^ with others in this state of Freedom; which
will however render their posterity happy, though the Parents in a pettish
humor, should always look on it with an eye of disdain and prejudice: But if
at length they would lay aside animosities, and seek peace and ensue it, then
the State not being constrained to keep up Forces at so vast a Charge to watch
over them in their designs, the public necessities would soon wear off and
with them the greatest part of our Burdens, and themselves might perhaps live
to see that happiness which they would not believe, but might have sooner
enjoyed, if they had not been so obstinate against Reason, and the Peace of
their native Country.

But if for all this, they shall stand up and say, They cannot be satisfied
without Episcopal government: They may talk what they will, yet there being no
visible footstep in Scripture of its institution, more than there is of the
other ways of Government practiced by others, why should wise men contend for
that as divine, which is merely prudential? seeing the late King pleaded
conscience for his insisting to maintain it only upon this account, that he was
sworn to do so, and we saw he did his utmost for it; which when he had done*
then, seeing the necessity of Affairs required the abolition of it, he in the
Isle of Wight-Treaty became content it should be abolished; to let his Friends
see, that having done what he could to preserve it, the thing it self was of no
such sacred Authority, but that it might be cashiered by Authority when
prudence did require it to be done. And therefore our Author likewise, having a
point of prudence to dispatch, which is, to hedge in the Presbyterian to his
Royal party, he also makes the divine darling of Episcopacie a mere prudential
matter, to be dismissed as his Masters occasion shall require, that so the
Royal Cause being to be swallowed, it may go gently down with the Presbyter,
and not offend his tender stomach Upon this account, page 3. he tells his
brother-Royalists, it will be difficult to set up the primitive Government of
the Church so he calls Episcopacie,) at least in its full height, because
against so great a multitude of eager dissenters, according to probability it
will not stand. Therefore page 11. he inviteth the Presbyterians to an
Accommodation, telling them, the differences are speculative, and that their
Contests with the Episcopal Divines are in the opinion of moderate men of
either judgment, easily attoned. Now if the Divines of both parties shall by
consent accommodate and complie with each other, (which appears to be one part
of the present design for bringing in Charles Stuart) what else do they both
thereby but plainly confess, that the Frames they have so long contended for
are but political* and liable to alteration as prudence shall direct? Seeing
then, that the Royalists obligation to the old State, whether Ecclesiastical or
Civil, is wholly defunct, and that the generality of them may much sooner mar
their own condition, by endevoring to bring Charles in, than mend it, and that
other things of Church and State are above their sphere (as private men) to
meddle with, what remains, but that they look through the Grandees Interest,
which is merely to draw them in, and pursue their own Interest only in
subserviencie to the Public; which is not to be done but by preserving the
Peace, and that cannot be otherwise than by a cordial uniting with us, to shut
all the doors of hope against him that would come in to disturb the Nation, and
make all things worse; as I shall sufficiently show in the ensuing parts of
this Discourse.

SECT. III.
Of the Presbyterian.

OUr Authors words are these: [ It is the Presbyterians Interest to bring in C.
Stuart, as the only way to preserve himself from ruin at the hands of those
lesser. Parties that have grown up under him, who utterly oppose all Government
in the Church.]

These are good words; and if we consider the present carriage of the
Presbyterian Ministers in Lancashire, who are blowing the Trompet to Rebellion
in those Northern parts, we may say they are so mad as to believe our Author,
that their joining with and for the Interest of C. Stuart, is the way to
preserve themselves from ruin. But because there are many sober and pious men
of that party in these Nations, who as yet stand clear from the imputation of
this foul design, therefore lest any should be tainted by the infection of that
ill example of their Lancashire brethren, to imbarque with the Royalists, give
me leave to lay before them several Considerations, to manifest, that by such
an imbarquement, a certain ruin must ensue to their way and party, in ease
that ejected Family should by their means be enabled to return.

First, As to your way of Church Government, it is a thing the Royalists will
hiss at after you have served their turns. For our Author himself cannot hold,
but in the midst of all his printed Courtships and Complements, he lets slip
these words, which (if you please) you may read Page 5.

[ The Presbyterians aim of setting up his Discipline has several
inconveniences; for, besides that it is rise must be the overthrow of all other
parties, which are more considerable in the Nation than themselves, that rigid
Government no way complies with the genius of the Nation, nor the frame of our
Municipal Laws; which the late King was well aware of, when he conceded to the
setting of it up for three years, being fully satisfied, how effectual an
argument the experience of that short time would be, to persuade the Nation to
endure so galling and heavy a yoke no longer.]

If this be the Royalists opinion (as you see it is) how can ye cotton
together? What can you of the Presbyterian judgment expect but certain ruin to
your way, and your persons, by such a clenching and closure with inconsistent
principles? Whereas, those that he calls the lesser parties which have grown up
under you, have hitherto allowed the men of your way as great a freedom as they
do enjoy themselves, and have admitted you to an equal participation with
others, of that grand privilege, Liberty of Conscience, which (however some of
you may flatter your selves) ye can never enjoy under a sort of people, that
will never be at rest without a Ranting Episcopacie.

Secondly Consider the animosity naturally inherent in the Royal party, and
their Head, against you. They will never leave buzzing in his ears to quicken
his memory, that the Interest of your party was in its infancy founded in
Scotland upon the ruin of his great Grandmother, continued and improved by the
perpetual vexation of his Grandfather, and at length prosecuted to the
decapitating of his Father. Be not so weak as to sooth your selves, that you
shall fare better than others, because you never opposed this young Gentleman's
person: It is ground sufficient for his hatred, that you bandied against his
Father, and the Prerogative, to which he conceives himself Heir; and to hate
you the more, because the making good of promises to you would be the clipping
of that Prerogative. It is the common sense of the Cavaliers, that you prepared
his Father for the Block, and are incensed at others because they took from you
the honor of the Execution: And in a Fast-Sermon preached upon the news of his
death before his Son, then at the Hague, Dr Creigheon told him, That the
Presbyterians pulled his Father down, and held him by the hair, while the
Independents out off his head: And after him, it was more elegantly expressed
by Salmasius in his Defens^o Regia; Presbyteriani sacrificium ligarunt,
Independentes jugularunt. Nor will he count your party any whit the less guilty
for your hypocritical protesting against the death of his Father, seeing in
Sermons printed several years before, you declared him over and over to be a
Man of Blood; The Scottish Ministers printed it, that he had shed more in these
three Nations, than was shed in the Ten Christian Persecutions; and upon the
same account, Mr. Love proclaimed in the pulpit at Vxbridge-Treaty, That no
Peace ought to be had with him. It was your party that reduced him (
diminutione capitis) into the condition of a Captive; and the Cavaliers say,
You unking'd him, you deprived him of his earthly Crown and kept him
languishing, whereas (they say) others were more courteous in sending him to an
heavenly. In short, you brought him (as it were) to the foot of the Scaffold,
whoever led him up. Now try the Cavaliers courtesy, if ye please, you that
have fought and preached against them; but remember this (though I trust ye
shall never have occasion) that when time serves, the Philosophers Maxim will
prove good Logic at Court, Qui vult media ad finem, vult etiam and ipsum
finem; He that wills the means conducing to the end, wills also the end it
self. Ergo (will the Courtiers say) seeing the Presbyterians did put such
Courses in practice, as tended to the Kings ruin, they certainly intended it,
and are as deep in it as others. I wish you may understand rather then feel,
what Conclusions will be drawn by them against you, from that Act of Justice.

Thirdly, consider, that as he has a most particular Antipathie against your
party, as the old enemies of his Family; so, with what promises soever he may
sooth you, yet you, of all other men, have least reason to trust him: Had not
your party in Scotland an experiment, when they entertained him there, how
little conscience he made of all his promises, and how (in a trice) he shuffled
out your Presbyterian Interest in that Nation, and turned up Trump, the
Cavalier. But that you may take a complete view of both his Faith and affection
toward you and your party, give me leave to refresh your memories with a little
History, to prove him one of whom you can take no hold, by any Oaths, Promises,
or Engagements whatsoever.

Take him before he went to Scotland, and the first place you have cause to
observe him in, was in the Isle of Jersey. Being there, the Presbyterians of
Scotland, by the consent and concurrence of the principal of their party in
England, made application to him, and it was declared a Treaty should be held
at Breda betwixt them, which by an Express he signified to the Presbyterians in
Scotland; nevertheless at the very same time, he privately sent away another
Express to Montrose, requiring him to go on vigorously with his designed
Invasion of Scotland against the same Presbyterians, because at the same time
likewise he was trucking with the Rebels of Ireland, hoping by their friendship
to have made his way into England without the Presbyterian shackle at his
heels. Yea, and that you may see, how hereditarily he hated the Presbyterian
Interest and party, he went far higher than ever his Father had done in
expressions of hatred: For, he continued utterly averse from Treating in good
earnest with the Presbyterian Scots and their friends, as long as he had any
the least hopes of effecting his business by Ireland, choosing rather to have
made an open Contract with those barbarous Rebels (into whose country he had
already transported his goods, and intended himself to follow) rather than want
executioners of his revenge against the godly of all opinions (whom he equally
detested) in England and Scotland: But at length, perceiving a fairer way paved
for him by Scotland, he did then (but would never till then) relinquish the
Irish, and seemed to close with the English and Scottish Presbyterians in the
Treaty concluded at Breda. -- Now consider, that as he never closed with them
till his Irish hopes were blown over, so being brought into Scotland by pure
necessity, he would do nothing there but what the same necessity constrained
him to, as appeared by his refusing to sign the Declaration of Kirk and State,
till the Lord Loudoun the Chancellor told him plainly in a Letter written to
him (which in those days was printed) that they would abandon and give him
over except he subscribed. Hereupon, he began to acknowledge and condole the
sins of his Family, etc. and to personate all that hypocrytical mockery of
Repentance which followed after, and took the Solemn League and Covenant* when
at the same time his Counsels were privately and wholly set for the destruction
of the Covenant and all its Abettors. For, no sooner had he taken up that
Visor, but immediately, the Kirk-partie losing the Battle at Dunbar, he laid it
aside again, and began openly to play his own game, rejoicing at their defeat,
and presently endeavored to give them the slip, and run away to the
Cavalierpartie, then up in the North of Scotland; wherein being prevented of
his design by force, his next refuge was, Divide and Impera, dividing the
Presbyterian party of Scots both in Kirk and State, the most considerable
whereof he overawed, or allured into his party, so that the most conscientious
among them were forced to declare against his proceedings, and retire in
discontent, and diverse others were cashiered, both of Kirk, State, and Army, to
make room for the most notorious Cavaliers and Malignants; whereupon in a short
time, it was counted little other than Sedition and Treason, to preach up those
very Principles that their King had sworn to in the Covenant and his
Coronation Oath; and so by this means, immediately the Cavaliers had all that
he held in Scotland at their own devotion. In these lines view his picture and
see how you like him, concerning whom it was necessary to be thus particular,
in giving you his Inside outward, that thereby it may be seen, the Complexion
of his Soul is not different from that of his Body, and what confidence is to
be placed by you, upon any Terms, in such a one, who can break a sunder the
strongest Ties of Faith, Oaths, Promises and Engagements, as so many straws and
rushes.

Trust him then, if ye please, and bring him in if ye dare, that by new
Experiments, to your own sorrow and Confusion, ye may learn, when it is too
late, that it was your true Interest as Presbyterians, by all means to keep him
out of the Nation. I speak not this to the grave and pious men of that way (in
which there are many such) but to the Heady Hot-spurs (of which sort there are
too many) ready to imbarque themselves upon mistaken grounds, and run blindfold
to destruction

It Is reported, that Conscience is now pleaded again by virtue of the Covenant,
which they say does (together with the Oath of Allegiance) oblige them to the
late King and his heirs. I shall not (because here I affect brevity) say any
thing now concerning the main Question of the Obligation of both, but must
refer you to what is said before to the Royalist touching this; but because
they will needs talk of the Covenant again, and our Cavalier Author presses it
also upon them, let me have leave to add one word more, to stop their mouths
for ever anent the Covenant: It is pure matter of Fact that shall convince
them. In the days of the late Protector Oliver, but more industriously and
remarkably in the time of the late Protector Richard, did the principal men
(both Clergy and Laity) of the Presbyterian party, in City and Country make
most solemn Addresses, to declare their Subjection, Submission, Allegiance, to
the Government of Father and Son, and that they would live and die for it,
adding their Prayers for all manner of Benedictions upon them, which is a
matter I can affirm of my own knowledge. Now pray you let us reason a little
upon this: When ye made those Addresses, either the obligation of the Covenant
to old Charles and his heirs did remain in force at the same time, or it did
not; If it did remain in force, the question is, with what conscience ye could
suspend the obligatory power of it, and make so serious professions (using the
name of God and so much Scripture phrase) to bind your selves in a Bond of
Allegiance to a new Prince and Family? If it did not remain in force toward
Charles at that time, then we would feign know, how it, and your other Oaths (as
to the obligatory power of them) could die or take a nap for five or six years,
and at the six years end revive, and stand in full force and virtue again for
the Stuarts against the present Parliament; sure nothing less then a magical
Spel can conjure up that Covenant after it has been so long dead, and make a
goblin of it, to fright men out of their wits, and from their duty; there must
needs be some enchantment or mystery in the business* and there is no way to
unriddle it with the saving of your credit; for, wise men now plainly see there
must be little of Conscience, but much of the Party and Faction in any future
pretense or Plea drawn from the Covenant for quarreling at this Parliament;
because if you could dispense with it for a closing with the Protector, you may
by the same Reason as well do it to close with the present Power (for ought
that the Covenant, in respect of the Stuarts can oblige to the contrary) seeing
the ^nterest of the Protector as absolutely led him to an exclusion of the
former Family, as the Interest of this Parliament (and indeed of the whole
Nation) does to an utter abjuration of it for ever. Thus the matter of Fact
being clear, and the Inference upon it, I see no excuse, no hole that ye have
to shift out at but one, and that is, by saying that when ye so highly
addressed your selves to the last Protector, ye did it in word, but in deed ye
reserved your hearts for C. Stuart. How can this stand with the reverend
reputation of such men as Mr. Baxter? who, as the other eminent Ministers
addressed personally in a Body, so he in print (in the Epistle Dedicatory to
the last Protector before his Disputations of Church Government) concluded
himself, after all other Complements, A faithful Subject of your Highness, etc.
And yet the same Mr. Baxter in his late Book entitled, A Holy Commonwealth,
has the confidence to insist upon the Covenant, and though therein he pleads
not positively for Charles Stuart, yet in many places of it we see which way he
looks, he does that which is equivalent thereto: He disowned the pretended
Covenant-obligation to Charles, by addressing himself to Richard; but when a
third Power comes in play, then the Covenant comes up again for Charles. The
only evasion then which they and he can have, must be but a miserable one, viz.
That when they owned the Protector, they did it not really, but only (as a
pious fraud) out of some design they had thereby to make way for his Rival, the
other Single person; and truly, that would be most miserable hypocrisy, to let
the world see they can play fast and loose with Oaths and Covenants, take them
up and let them fall, as may best fit their ends and purposes: God forbid they
should so debauch the reverence of their Function, as to shake hands with the
Jesuit before all the people, in the odious principle of Equivocating and
mental Reservation! But we have cause to expect better things from the
generality of that party (both Ministers and people) who being men of piety and
prudence, cannot but condemn the practices of such as have shown themselves
extravagant, in the present dawnings of a new day of Rebellion, and must needs
see, that if it prosper, whatever the pretenses of the Ringleaders be at first,
(fair and plausible) yet of necessity the issue at last must be this, that the
Game will be played wholly into the hands of him, who is the Head of your sworn
Enemies, from whose fury and revenges you have no way to secure your party* but
by keeping him out of the Dominion; which cannot otherwise be done, than by a
cordial close with this Parliament, under whom you possess so large immunities
and enjoiments; their Authority being the only visible Fence against the
others tyranny: And if you please to strengthen their hands, you will shorten
their work, and enable them speedily to settle a Real State of Freedom to your
selves, and others, and transmit the same by a happy succession of Parliaments
to posterity.

SECT. IV.
Of the Baptized.

THe words of our Author concerning them, are these, [ As to the Interest of
the Baptized Churches, their pretensions of throwing down all other parties not
being feizable, it is their Concern to acquiesce in the most moderate
Church Government, which is certainly the Episcopal, etc.]

For answer to this, Pray you remember only, how moderate and tame a
Government the Episcopal was, and how gently it dealt with tender consciences,
and men of different judgments, and then consider, what may be expected for the
future by you, against whom (of all other parties) the late King and his
Prelacy did manifest (when time was) a most implacable enmity, as I shall prove
by instances by and by; in the mean time, pray observe here, that while our
Author courts you with the one hand, he throws dirt with the other, basely
branding you as a sort of people, whose very pretensions are destructive of all
other parties: And if the Royalists dare thus openly tell you already, to your
faces, what monstrous opinion they have concerning you, ye may easily imagine
what Quarter ye must look for under them and their Episcopacie.

But that you may more clearly foresee, take notice what our Author says
further concerning you in another place, page 6. [ The pretensions of the
Baptized Churches have these Inconveniences attending them; As first, importing
the ruin of all other Professions of Religion.] This is so odious a scandal,
but so common in the mouths of the Cavaliers, that you cannot choose but imagine
beforehand how kindly they will use you. But it is strange, that so wise a
Politician as our Author would seem to be, should so far forget himself, and
his design, as to betray it. You see in the former Section, he made it his
business to court the Presbyterian to a compliance with Episcopacie, for a
settlement, yet presently after says, the Rise of their Presbyteria must be
the Ruin of all other Parties; which being clearly contrad^ctory to what he
pretends, he has a wondrous method of persuading men to a clo^^ with his
purpose: In like manner, while he is persuading you to come into a settlement
with the Cavaliers and the other Parties, his stomach is so high* that it must
have vent, to tell you, that no other Party can settle with you, you also will
be the Ruin of all other.

Yea, he goes higher, in the same place, and says, [ That your (...), if
attained, cannot possibly subsist, it being a Maxim in Policy, ^ Religion is
the Cement of Government, without a public Profession of which, and the
maintenance of Learning and Ministry, Atheism and disorder must needs break in]
So that the Author having scandalized you as incoherent with, and destructive
of, all other parties he would also make the world believe you have no
foundation to stand upon, intimating, as if by your principles there could be
no public Profession of Religion nor Learning, or Ministry, but only Atheism
and disorder. Yea more than all this, he will have you, by your principles
likewise, to be enemies of Government it self, either in a single person, or a
community: men that cannot incorporate into a Civil Society of any kind, but
would t^ke away all prop^rty of Estates, and found it only in Grace and
Saintship; for the exemplification of which, he refers his Reader, to the
practices in Germany by the Anabaptists there.

Now, admit there should be any sorts of men in these Nations, who agree with
you touching the controvertible point of Paedo-baptism: but in other things
differ extremely from you by new extravagant opinions, there is no reason that
the extravagancies should be fastened upon all of you that are for the first
point and opinion; for it is known that many learned men and others, have been,
and are of the same judgment* who touching other particulars are as Orthodox
(if I may use the word) as any; besides, Mr. Cawdrey says, The Scriptures are
not clear, that ^nfant-baptism was an Apostolical practice; and Bishop Morton
in his Appeal, lib 2. c. 13. sect. 3. acknowledges there was ancient practice
for admitting Infants to the Sacrament of the Supper* as well as to Baptism,
and it held Six hundred years in the Church, yet in later time it was thought
fit to be laid aside. Shall any presume then to fasten an odium upon a whole
party which abounds with pious men (truly Protestant in the other points)
merely because some others who think as they do concerning Paedo-baptism, do
fly out into other Notions? By this rule of proceeding, I will easily condemn,
not Popery it self, and Prelacy only, but other professions of men, whom (to
avoid offense) I will not now name, because there is no one party of them but
have their Transcendentals, which render them u^pleasant to the Civil power,
and to dissenting parties, and would, if they might have their way, prove as
dangerous as any: But this shall not therefore be an argument against the whole
parties themselves, among whom the most are men of sobriety and gravitie and
such we must allow to be the constitution of the baptized party, which our
Author here would kiss and kill, complement and cut the throats of both at an
instant he pretends to settle with them, yet at the same time declares in
effect, That it is impossible there should be any settlement by them, with
security to any other party. But enough of this

It is no wonder then if Charles Stuart the Son who is heir to the revenge, as
well as to the party and principles of the Father, shall endeavor to blast you
of the Baptized Judgment before all others; but from thence you may collect
what a portion of vengeance against you especially, lies at the bottom of his
heart, and the hearts of his party: In the beginning of the Civil War, the
blame and envy of it was by the King, in his Declarations, cast upon you as the
principal causers; and now, could his Son by fine words allure you to a close
with him upon terms (which, considering you as men in your right senses, I
count utterly impossible) I might suppose you should be the first that would
find what his intents are concerning his Fathers opposers, did I not fear he
would prefer his new Presbyterian friends before you. But hear a little what
the old Man said of you in his Papers, which are to be seen in the Book of
Collections. In a Declaration of his, published in answer to a Declaration of
the Parliament, for raising all force and power, as well Trained Bands as
others, etc. He charge the Parliament, that by their infinite arts and
subtilty, and by that rabble of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries,
which were ready at a call, they were enabled to carry on their work. And in
his other Declaration, dated August 12. he iterateth the same, saying, The
Parliament made their power up to oppose him, by a multitude of Brownists,
Anabaptists, and other Sectaries about London, who were ready to appear in a
body at their command. And before he ends that long Declaration, he has
another fling at the odious license (so he terms it) which the rabble of
Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries took to themselves* In like manner
he brandisheth his fury against those (so called) in another Declaration which
he published after the Battle of Keinton. And in his Paper, entitled* An offer
of Pardon to the Rebels (so he was pleased to call the Parliament) he says,
Religion and his posterity was threatened to be rooted out, and his life sought
after by Anabaptists, Brownists, and Atheists, etc. in Rebellion. And in his
Message to the Lords of his Privy Council in Scotland, he fastneth all manner
of foul imputations upon the same party of men. The like in his Declaration,
upon occasion of the Ordinance and Declaration of the Lords and Commons, for
assessing all such as had not contributed sufficiently, etc. As also in his
Answer to the Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London. And lastly, in his Proclamation directed to the Counties of Surrey*
Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire* wherein he once again reckons those whom he
calls Anabaptists and Brow^ists, in the same predicament with Atheists, and the
only persons that threatened to destroy him, and to root up Religion and his
posterity: All which (how false soever it was) may be seen in the aforesaid
Bo^k of Collections; and the like with much more, in the Book published as his
own, entitled, EIKON ASILK.

These things being so declared by the Father, no matter whether they be true;
but if Charles be his Son, he is in duty bound to believe him, and then there
need not many words to mind you of your Interest and Concernment, which cannot
lie to you nor deceive you; but if you keep close to it, and at the remotest
distance from that Family, you may promise your selves both Liberty and
Safety; otherwise, I leave to your own judgment, whether (in a Moral or
Political sense) it be not utterly impossible to secure it.

SECT. V.
Of the Neuter.

A Great part of the Nation may be said to be Neuters; that is to say, persons
not addicted to any one Party, but would fain have Peace, and no Taxes, and are
possessed with a fantasy, that there is no way to procure ^he one, of be rid
of the other, but by letting in Charles Stuart, and then (...) to promise
themselves good days, with the enjoyment of Laws (...), which they are ready
to think they have lost, if they be put to a ch^^ge m^^e than ordinary for the
real ma^ntenance of them. For the undeceiving of such* let me spread these
following Considerations.

First, That the Parliament have for the maintenance of their Authority, a most
considerable Power in their hands. They have their Army consisting still of
their old Officers, and the Soldiery trained up in their old most ^xcellent way
of military discipline; moreover, they have the Militia formed (or actually
forming) in all parts of the Nation, besides the hearts of h^ndred thousands
engaged by Interest to fight (if the matter should be at pinch) for keeping out
the Stuarts; and you cannot but remember what B^d^es of them appeared in Arms,
when this Young man heretofore inva^ed E^g^and, and seated himself at
Worcester, by which means a settled war was at that time happily avoided. Now,
if by Insurrections way should be made for him to come in again and he by that
means fix himself in any place of s^reng^h, what can the issue of men's going in
to him to augment this power be, but a rending of the Nation again by a war of
continuance, seeing the Parliament have the Strong holds of the Nation, and
several Armi^s imme^iately raisable, if occasion require: And if things should
come to this pass* it is lamentable to consider what would then befall the
Country; the Harvest (now ready for the sickle) would be devoured by horse;
Freequarter must unavoidably come on again, and that would be a welcome guest to
call upon you in Winter, after you had lost all the Fruits of the Summer: I
suppose you have not yet forgotten the teeth of that devouring Monster, and you
would have cause to remember it to some purpose, if Foreiners should be poured
in again upon you, which we must thank our own Countrymen for, if they prepare
the way for their com^ng, as they already begin very fairly. And if Foreign
force come in* (as who knows what may follow when a war is once begun?) then
what can the present pretenders for Liberty with swords in their hands expect,
but that Charles and his Cavaliers, with the help of Foreiners, will erect their
Triumphs upon the ruin of all opposite parties (even those of them who now
wheel about for him) and the subversion of the Rights and Liberties of the
People, under the insupportable yoke of an absolute Monarchy? (for, what will
promises signify when he shall get the power?)

Secondly consider, That after a dreadful War past, you are yet in possession
of the Blessings of Peace; and though you taste not the sweets of it so fully
as we could wish, because of the Payments now lying upon you, yet be patient
and consider, whence do these Payments spring? not from the nature of the
Government it self, nor from the Wills of the present Governors, whose Interest
it is to have it otherwise, if they knew how, but from pure necessity; and
whence comes that necessity? Charles Stuart and his Cavaliers can tell you,
for, they make it their business to create it more and more by framing designs
against the Peace and Government of the Commonwealth; and how come they to be
able to do this? even by the folly and madness of Malecontented persons and
parties, who ever and anon suffer themselves to be drawn in by them: It is this
that puts the Parliament upon the necessity of keeping Forces on foot, and
consequently of continuing Taxes to pay Forces, defray Public Debts, and other
necessary incident Expenses, without which the Peace, Safety, and Government
of this People cannot be maintained. Therefore if Burdens be continued, blame
not your Governors, but such Boutefeus as are apt to take fire at the Enemies
persuasions, and are now in Arms to set on fire the three Nations. If such as
they would be quiet and settled in their minds, that the Parliament might have
leave to settle free from the attempts of rebellious spirits, Necessities would
begin to wear off from the face of the Commonwealth; by degrees we might be
eased of Grievances and Pressures, and be made sensible of the rich benefits of
a State of Freedom; but if men will be hankering after the public Enemy, and
flying out by Insurrections, neither peace nor ease can be expected

But if Charles Stuart (say some) were brought in and settled, then all things
^ould settle too. For Answer to this, though the vanity of expecting a
convement settlement by him, be made clear enough to the parties treated of in
the foregoing Sections, yet having fallen upon a more popular way of arguing, to
convince men of a Neutral temper, that are of no party, but all for peace and
ease, let me apply my self to them accordingly. Pray you let us reason the Case
a little; If ye think ye shall be eased of Excise* Taxes, etc. by letting in
him* ye will be miserably mistaken: For, these vast charges will presently
ensue; 1. A large expense for maintaining the splendour of a Royal Court, which
must be had either by resuming King, Queen and Princes Lands* though some think
that cannot be done, the thing in it self not being feisible, because of the
incredible confusion it would introduce generally upon Property; or else, if it
cannot be had that way, it must be drained perpetually out of the peoples
purses. 2. There must be a course taken to find rewards for Foreiners, if any
come in (as it is past question they will, if a war go on again) and if they
should not come, yet Charles his Followers and Leaders, the younger Brothers,
with the Sons of Fortune, and the Brethren of the Blade, must all be provided
for, at that day, those who have been of no side shall be found as great
sinners as any, and the City of London, who (as the Cavaliers swear) have
gained by the Wars, shall be remembered as the Beginner of them; and then it
will be too late for the vaporing Companions of the smoking Clubs to say, I,
and I, and I was always (as our neighbors know) a Friend of his Majesty. 3.
Besides the public Debts of the Nation, which must be paid, the Young Man has
innumerable vast Debts contracted by himself beyond Sea; those must be paid
too* and which way (I pray you) but out of the general Purse? Think ye then,
that this is the way to be eased of Excise and Taxes? The necessities would so
increase by Charles* that they must upon his coming in be trebled to what they
are now upon you.

Thirdly consider That as by his Restitution we shall be far from ease of
Burdens, so we must of necessity be much farther from attaining peace and
settlement, because the discontents of all parties, which must be taken in, in
order to a settlement, will be raised to a higher pitch of animositie; which is
easily concluded from the hints given by our Author, already noted in the
former Sections. For, he tells us, Episcopacie shall be the chief Cornerstone
in the Building of the settlement; the Presbyterian Interest (he says) shall
be taken in to carry on the work, and you know they were ever wont to be like
two Pellets, one driving out the other; so that it would be a luckie hand that
can make them agree now: Well, but admit they could walk in couples and comply,
what then will become of the poor Sectaries (as they call them?) they also,
being a huge body, ought to be taken in likewise with satisfaction, viz
Independents, Baptized, Fifth Monarchy men, etc. or else where is your
settlement? And how that will be done, God knows, seeing the two first (as they
reckon themselves) will be reputed the eldest Sons of our Mother the Church,
and though they agree in nothing else, are like to agree in this, that having
brachium seculare, the Arm of Secular power to use, they will be too straightly
lacing the tender Virgin, Liberty of Conscience, or else ravish her, and that
will stir up all her Friends to the Rescue. Our Author has told you, that the
Royal and Episcopal man looks upon the Presbyterian (as one whose Discipline
cannot be settled without the overthrow of all other parties, besides that it
suits not (he says) with the Laws, nor with the genius of the Nation; the like
harsh sentence he passes upon those of the Baptized way; and the Presbyterian,
he thinks as hardly of the Royal Episcoparian, and of the Baptized, as these
latter do of both them. There had need be extraordinary skill then in tempering
Mortar before you can daub or cement all these together; but that being
impossible, the issue will be that his Majesty's darling, Episcopacie, being
like to rule the roste, may think it wisdom to hold in a while with
Presbytery, to make use of her spleen in persecuting and weakening the other
dissenting Parties* and afterward wipe the nose of Presbytery her self, and at
length attempt to clap them all together under Hatches; now what would this be,
but to put them to begin the world again, to redeem themselves once more from
that yoke of ancient Tyranny, after it had been but newly cast off? But
suppose that the Episcopal Project may not presently mount so high, yet it will
always be Trump where there is a Stuart in the Throne (for old Charles in his
Book strictly enjoins it); and what can either of these things produce but the
same necessity of his keeping Forces on foot to secure the Tyranny in his own
and his Bishops hands, against the rest of the People, as the Parliament is
constrained now to do, for securing Liberty of Conscience, and all other
Rights and Liberties of the People, against the Return of that Tyranny? If so
(as things would certainly, unavoidably so fall out) surely its evident the
same Taxes, and Payments as are now, must be continued under Charles, with
additions of new ones as yet unheard of, to be entailed upon the generations
after us. Things therefore being thus, it is clearly concludible, that the way
the Parliament is now in design upon, viz. to s^cure the Liberty of these
Nations in Spirituals and Civils, and establish Affairs upon that Foundation,
which does really take in the Interest of the whole people (except some who
have contracted an unmanly false Interest to themselves, in desiring to be
slaves) is the only course whereby men may rationally expect to arive unto a
settlement* and consequently open a way for diminishing Taxes; whereas the
other way of Charles Stuart is so narrow* that it admits the Interest only of
some few, a sort of men who will always be practicing to domineer, to the
dissatisfying and disobliging all other parties, the Consequence whereof will
be a continuation of such discontents, as must put the Monarch to stand always
upon his guard to preserve his Power, which cannot be done without great Forces
ever to be kept on foot, and so the same or greater Taxes ever to be paid, and
no way in reason left for a remedy while things stand upon a Monarchick
Episcopal, or a Mongrel-Episcopo-Presbyterian Bottom (call it which ye please)

SECT. VI.
Of the Army.

THe great Block in the way of the Cavaliers design, has always been the
Army, and if that could be removed or debauched, then they would easily
complete it: No wonder then our Author uses so many Arts of Insinuation to
attempt the seducing of them from a sense of their own and the public
Interest, to an espousing of Charles; which were a miracle indeed, could it be
effected, but certainly not without wonderful Sorcerie, whereas, for ought yet
appears in our Author, we cannot take him for a Witch, nor suspect his Pemphlet
to be guilty of any strong Enchantment. First, he would inflame the Nation
against the Soldiery, saying, Their aim is to govern it by the sword, and keep
themselves from being disbanded. The falsehood of this is evident* for, they
have restored the Parliament to the Law making part, and for the other part of
Government, the execution and distribution of Law, it is as full and free as
ever, as every man that frequents the Term can tell you. But he brandishes this
discourse of the sword, on purpose to dazzle men's eyes, that they may not
discern that sword of Charles Stuart which yet lurks in the Scabbard, but must,
if he get in, of necessity be drawn (as is shown in the foregoing Section) and
held over the people, to give Law to all other Laws which concern men's
property, or their Liberty of Conscience. It is the Armie's or rather the
Parliament and peoples sword in the Armie's hand, which secureth all men from
the power and revenge of his sword, which were it once in action, would soon
cut the throat of all our Liberties.

Next, he strikes upon another string, to try whether that will make any
jarring, telling the Army it is the Parliaments interest to pull them down, and
that the raising County Troops and new Militia's, is designed only to check
and curb them. So here in two lines the Cavalier has discovered his two
notable designs: He knows there is no way for him to pull down both Parliament
and Army, but in dividing them by discontents, and making them pull at one
another; and he knows also, that the ready way to facilicate the effecting of
his main purpose is, to beget a misunderstanding and an animosi tie betwixt the
Army and the Country Militia's, that they may jar with each other, and not be
cordially united to cheek and curb that Cavalier design which is now on foot
(though in a disguise) and laid for the common ruin both of Parliament and
Army, City, and Country.

The Author having projected his plot thus, he proceeds to improve it, and
ventureth to tell the Army, it is their interest to bring in the King; but why?
1. Because every Soldier is sensible we are concerned to be under a single
person. It is quickly said without proof; and the Soldiers expect reason before
they believe: for (as you say well) they are not like the French or Spanish
Infantry, those venal souls that understand nothing besides pay and plunder,
but, as becomes an English Army fighting for their Rights and Freedoms, have
always argued matters before they acted, and still owned a public spirit; and
the meanest of them can tell you, there are several ways of being governed
without a single person; and that it concerns them howsoever, as high as their
heads to keep out that single person whom God made them Instruments to cast
out, and never be ensnared either by promises from him* or by discontents among
themselves. 2. Because thereby they cut off the necessity of perpetual war.
Before this in Page 4. the Gentleman said, It is the Armies interest to be
always engaged in War, that they may keep themselves from dis^ding; and here he
tells them it is their Interest to bring the KING* because that would put* an end
to War. Riddle my Riddle, and reconcile these two Points if you can, but the
Author must say any thing to create division and discontent, among us; and
rather than said he will scribble Contradictories, and cares not though he set
one part of his Pamphlet a quarrelling with the other, to reach us the wit to
avoid his design, and live in unity and amity.

3. Because without calling in him, they will hazard their Acquisitions. Cujus
contrarium verum est; there is no reader way to hazard them* Crown Lands being
by many of them acquired for their Pay; and if it be possible, a way will be
found out by Charles for a Resumption.

4. Because it is the way to secure their Pay and Arrears, he being the only
person that can (with a free Parliament) raise Contributions and Taxes in a
Legal manner. Believe it if you list, but consider, that first his own Party
must be paid and provided for, and then he may be at leisure to pay you with a
vengeance. Besides, admit he should mean really to provide you your Arrears
too, what an incredible vast Charge would both be to the Nation: what an
opportunity would he have to devise new impositions and payments, and when you
are paid off ye shall (ye may be sure) be turned off, then none remaining in
Arms but his own pure party, twill be easy to find pretenses to continue
those Payments, and make Parliaments (which no doubt will then be led in a
string in a brave state of Freedom) to establ^sh them by a Law unto posterity:
It shall all be done in a Legal manner, and the Army, and we, and all shall be
paid (I warrant ye) according to Law, ( Club-law, Cavalier-Law, Warren-Law.)

They have often been attemp^ing to bring Matters to this pass; and therefore
give me leave to spread a few more particulars for the consideration of our
Friends the Army. First consider, that having often failed by force, they now
assail you by Force and Fraud both together; you cannot forget their malice,
though now they sawn, and would fain seem to hug you, that they may be able to
get within you, and trip up your heels, or grasp you to death. Remember how
often by your matchless courage and fidelity, ye have rescued the Commonwealth
out of their hands. They have drawn the poor people no less than three several
times into open insurrection and rebellion. Besides this, they brought on the
Scots, to a miserable oppression and devastation of the Land by two several
invasions, in all which God enabled you to defeat their expectations and
forces; so that besides the quelling of their power and interest in Scotland,
the hand of the Lord has gone out so visibly against them in three distinct
Wars, that they have been no less than thrice miraculoussy and completely
conquered here at home, and the blood which they sought has been drawn out of
their own sides, to fill up the Cup of the Lord's indignation and fury against
themselves and all their Partakers. Though it were possible you could forget
their implacable temper, yet for these things they will never forget you.

Secondly* Take heed of Promises, all ye that have ever been engaged against
that Family and Party: Is it not strange to hear that some who have been so
active against him openly, should now engage for him under a disgaise? What
security can they have therein for themselves or the Nation? Oh, but our Author
tells us, young Charles is a good man, in all respects; and as to his honesty,
no malice has the impudence to blast it. Though we could say somewhat to one
Part of his honesty, yet we wave it, but in the other part of honesty which
concerns oaths and promises, we might say he has blasted himself, but that
he ought not to seem over-serious about them, lest while he pretends to a
Crown, he should lose his credit with the Politicians, that would think him
unfit to be a KING. But they need not doubt him, he has made proof enough of
himself in that particular, having most Royally given evidence, that to trust
him is the right way to true Repentance: If ye look into my Third Section, ye
may there see how like a KING he carried himself in the Trust given him by the
Presbyterians, when they made him a White Boy in Scotland, by clothing him
with the Covenant, and a Coronationoath, and Royal Robes all together.

Thirdly consider, that as you have had the Honor hitherto, to stand firm to
the Nations true interest in opposition to that Family; so while they pretend
here in print to court you, their great business is at the same time to make
you jealous of the Parliament, the Parliament of you, and at once to exasperate
all parties of men against you, that being diffident of each other, and
discontented; ye may not be in a condition vigorously to unite your Counsels
and Forces against the design which they have now in hand for the ruin of all.
Make much then of this Parliament; they are the founders of the Nations
Interest upon a better Basis of Freedom than our Ancestors could ever hope
for, and questionless they must needs be most concerned and fittest to finish
the Building, seeing it is their own Interest as well as the Public, and they
have most experience in the work. Charles Stuart is for the giving of our wise
men, and our interested men, a Rotation as quick as may be. Therefore certainly
it is your interest to stand by the Parliament with your ancient courage and
affection; beat down the enemies before you, and so, when you have gained*
Victory, ye will be in the ready way of getting your Arrears out of the Purses
of your Adversaries, which will be the greatest comfort to your selves, and an
ease to the People: more words might be used; but you see where your Interest
does lie, and if you follow it strenuously, it cannot lie, it will not deceive
you, whereas if you swerve but from a tittle of it, your enemies will soon slip
into one Advantage or other, to bring trouble and desolation upon the Land,
ruin upon your selves and all your Friends.

SECT. VII.
Of the Parliament.

THe Parliament being the Butt, at which the Adversaries shoot all their bitter
Arrows of reproach and envy, it will be necessary to be particular in curing
the Wounds which have of late been given to their Reputation, because their
Being is the grand Bulwark of our security.

But in the first place, to sandalize them our Author says, It is the design
of the Parliament, to continue themselves in absolute Power by the specious
name of a Popular Government, and finally to set up an Oligarchy.

By this you see. 1. That which the enemy principally fears, is, lest this
Parliament should continue overlong; could they but be rid of this Parliament,
they presume they should do well enough afterward, either with or without
another, and therefore their Work is (if they knew how) to precipitate the
ending of it: But to confute the folly of this Scandal, it is known they have by
a special Vote already fixed a time (short enough indeed, considering the
greatness of their work, and the opposition like to be against them) beyond
which they intend not to sit.

2. As to the other Point of erecting an Oligarchy or Government by some few
Persons, this is as great a scandal as the other, and it were to be wished,
that the over-busie talk and Prints of some of our own had not given too much
occasion for opening the mouth of the Enemy touching that particular. But how
should there be any ground for suspicion about an Oligarchy? seeing no such
thing can be (as by many reasons might be proved) where a supreme Legislative
Power is intended to be fixed in an orderly succession of Parliaments, managed
by elections rightly qualified and bounded: for which with all convenient
speed, a course will be taken by this Parliament.

Secondly, our Author endeavors to make this no free Parliament, by reason that
a great part of its Members remain Secluded. This Argument has been handled
likewise with great fury by Mr. Pryn, and now the present Malcontents in Arms
make use of it to countenance their Rebellion, and require that either the
Secluded Members may be admitted to sit again in this Parliament, or that a New
one may be called. So that you see, they and our Cavalier Author do meet in one
Point. For Answer to this, I wish Mr Pryn, and the other dissatisfied
Gentlemen, would take heed of this way of arguing; for, by it he may chance to
condemn himself, and all others of his own judgment for their acting along with
the Parliament, first, after the King went away from Westminster, and then,
after part of the Members of both Honses withdrew, and sat as a Parliament at
Oxford, seeing thereby he will justify the King in what he declared at that
time against the Parliament, viz. That it was no free Parliament, and so that
nothing they should do, in the absence of himself and those Membe^s, could be
counted valid of Parliamentary, because they had, in countenancing tumults,
driven him, and their Follow members away by force, and so gained the Major
Vote of the remaining part of the Parliament: Nevertherless, when the remaining
part sat and continued to Act, the Parliamentary party made no scruple to Act
with them, and Mr Prynne among the rest as highly as any, as also did all those
of the Presbyterian Judgment, who, though the Parliament wanted the legal for
malitie of the Kings presence, and so great a part of its Members (who Printed
in several Declarations, That a force was upon them;) yet rather than the
public Cause should fall to the ground, they by Sermons, Purses, and all other
ways, seconded that remaining part of the Parliament in their actings,
acknowledging them a free Parliament, to all intents and purposes, as if every
Member had been present. But you will object and say, The Case of this House
now sitting, is different from that House who then sat; for, they were
deserted by those Members that went to Oxford, but these suffered the Army by
force to seclude those now commonly called the secluded Members. I answer; that
before these Members were secluded, they first secluded and separated
themselves from the public Interest, as those did, who some years before
withdrew themselves, and went to Oxford; besides, the secluding of them is
justifiable against* them by Lex talionis, the Law of Retaliation; for even
they had sometime before secluded that honest party of the House (of which the
Members now sitting are the principal) by raising tumults in the City, and
encouraging the Apprentices, who came to the House door, and drove away the
said faithful party, so that the Speaker and they were for safety forced to
go out of Town, and shelter themselves under the protection of the Army: In the
mean while, those who now complain of seclusion, reckoning themselves Lords of
all, continued sitting, chose a new Speaker, (Mr. Pelham) acted all things as a
full and free Parliament, and reckoned their Votes and Proceedings as Legal and
Authentic, as if all the Members had been present; and would so have proceeded
to compass and establish the corrup: Interest contended for against the
faithful party: And Mr. Prynne, and all his party, approved this proceeding,
and sufficiently showed, that they meant to own all as Legal, that should be do
e while the faithful ones were under a force, had not the design been prevented
by the Generals bringing back the Speaker, and the Members with him, to their
Seats again in the House. What shall we say then? Let me use the words of the
Apostle to him, and the rest of his secluded party, and their Abetters, [
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O men, whosoever thou art that judge, wherein
thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that judge, do
the same things.] If you, after a violent seclusion of some, upon a corrupt
account, could approve and close with the proceedings of a remaining part as a
Parliament, and intend the Nation should do so to; why are not we, after a
like seclusion made of your party upon a just accotins, and a restoring of the
faithful party to be justified for acting along with them, and submitting to
their Authority as a Parliament? And the Nation has as much reason to pay
their obedience and acknowledgments thereto, as ye intended they should have
done to you. Therefore whatever other men may fa) Mr. Prynne and his secluded
party must hence forth be silent, and for shame lay their mouths in the dust
for ever, a to th^s particular. -- But that we may give a more full answer to
this so considerable a Point, and that the world may see how far the House
which now (...), is to be justified before their secluded opposites, who make
so great a clamor to imbroil the Nation: I shall a little retrive the
proceedings of former days touching that Seclusion, which is become the great
Subject of Controversy now among us.

First, I shall show, there was a just cause, and a real necessity, for the
doing of it. Secondly, How the faithful Members (now the Parliament) behaved
themselves after it was done. Thirdly, How it came to pass, that the secluded
party did never sit more since that time, and are still excluded.

1. That there was just cause, and a real necessity for the doing of it, is
evident in these particulars: For, after that upon weighty consideration, the
House had resolved to make no more Addresses to the King, this secluded party
(who then were in play) joining Councils with the King and his party, cast
about which way to revoke and reverse those Votes of Non-Address, and to bring
in the King upon such Terms, the effect whereof, in a short time, would (of
necessity) have been a giving up into his hands the whole Cause that had been
contended for. To this end, they by subtle degrees drew all things on fair
toward a compliance with the Kings Interest, wherein there were some honest men
(even of the Presbyterian party) who seeing it was the way to cast dirt in the
face of their former Engagements, did desert them. Nevertheless, they were
engaged now upon new grounds, in opposition and hatred of those, both in
Parliament and Army, who desired to remain faithful to the Cause and Interest
of the Nation; therefore the next step they made in the House, was, to contrive
how to strengthen their party there, and by indirect courses to gain the Major
Vote: For this end, it was the great endeavor of them, and of that Remnant of
the Royal, and the Neutral party, which yet remained in the House, because of
the vacancy of Burgesses, to fill up the House with Malignants or Neuters; and
for that purpose, Writs were specially procured and speeded out for new
Elections to fill the vacant places, and they were directed to such places and
poor Boroughs in Cornneal, Wales, etc. where the Procurers beforehand knew,
that persons would be enosen sit to serve their turns. Thus a Flood of new
Burgesses were brought into the House, some of them men that had been engaged
against the Parliament, and incap^ble of Trust, yet were through the
procurement also of the aforesaid party, admitted and kept in the House; for,
when diverse of these were questioned as unduly elected, matters were by others
so ordered, that the same new elected persons under question, sitting in the
House while their business was in agitation, they easily wrought, that the
sense of the Committee concerning the undueness of their Elections was never
reported, but held off from the House.

Having thus fitted the House for their turn, they then begin to play Rex for
the King. They first debate the business of Ireland; from thence they recalled
the Lord Lisle, and put the command into the hands of Inchiquin, a Native
Irishman, one that had first served the King, afterward revolted from the
Parliament, united with the Irish Rebels, and is now a Fugitive with Charles
beyond Sea. They endeavored to bring in the King upon his Message of the
seventh of May* 1647. (that is to say, upon his own Terms) and to this end to
disband the Army before any peace made of assured. They would have raised a new
War, by lifting and engaging many Reformadoes, and other Officers and Soldiers
in and about London, in June and July, 1647. To this end they by Tumults drove
away the Speaker and faithful Members, chose a new Speaker, passing by their
single Authority diverse Ordinances, and giving large powers to raise a new
War, by arming also the Prentices and other persons which had acted that
violence upon the House, and this they did professedly before the world, in
maintenance and prosecution of that treasonable engagement. Being thus gotten
into possession, they recalled the Votes of Non-Address, and went downright
the way to bring back the King, without such satisfaction as might secure the
Kingdom. Voting that they would treat with him upon such Propositions as
himself should make, so that had they had their purpose, the whole Cause.
Parliamentary, and its faithful friends must have been clearly betrayed into
his hands.

But it must not be forgotten, how craftily they went to work for the
completing of their design; and it is the more needful to revive the
proceedings, because the same spirit appears at work again, in the like method,
by those who have now taken Arms, and those who favor the present treasonable
undertaking; Their method (I say) and pretenses appear one and the same; for
those did what they could to irritate and engage the City of London: In all
Counties they had their Emissaries and Agents concurring with those employed by
the King, to form new Insurrections (which you know afterward brake forth all
over the Nation;) and to usher in these, the people were stirred up to frame
Petitions, all clothed in fine language, with fair pretenses; viz. That they
might have a full and free Parliament; they pretended for the Liberty of the
Subject also, to free them from the oppression of an Army, and to be for the
Law of the Land against the arbitra y power of a Faction in Parliament setting
up and supporting themselves above Law by the power of an Army. They pretended
likewise to be much for the ease of the people, to free them from Taxes and
Contributions to an Army, and to be for settlement, that there might be no need
of an Army. They pretended for Religion too against Sectaries; yea, and that no
pretense might be wanting, they pretended for the army it self also (as to the
body of it) That all, but a Faction of some Officers, might be satisfied their
Arrears: Pray you now compare these pretenses with those published by the
present Rebels in Cheshire, and the language of those that savor them in other
places, and judge whether the spirit of the same corrupt party be not now at
work again by new Instruments, who would likewise (if they might have their
ways) give up, not only the present Parliament, but with it the whole
Parliamentary interest of the Nation, and all men of all parties, yea, and
themselves to be disposed of at the will of the Son (for what can hinder that
Sea of boundless tyranny from overflowing, when the breach is once made, and he
let in?) just as the other would by bringing on a Personal Treaty to conclude
with the Father, have yielded all up to his pleasure. Actors (you see) are now
on foot again, disguised and clothed with the very same pretenses; and
therefore what can be more clear than that these men are studying to bring the
Young Man upon the stage, to perfect the Tragedy which was plotted so many years
ago, in that endeavor for a restitution of his Father? which would assuredly
have been completed in an absolute Tyranny, had not the Army then taken up a
noble resolution to prevent it, by secluding that desperate party which ruled
at that time in Parliament. So much (though much more might be said) for the
justice and necessity of the Seclusion.

2. Let us see how the remaining Members behaved themselves upon this Occasion.
They did not, as Mr. Pryn, and our Author, and others, have scandalized them,
drive away their Fellow Members, nor encourage the Army to do it (as Mr. Pryn,
and his fellows had before encouraged the Apprentices to drive away the
Speaker, and the best part of the Members) but when the Seclusion was made, the
House presently sent out the Sergeant with the Mace to the place called the
Queens Court (where those Members were then detained) to command their
Attendance in the House, but the Guards of Soldiers would not permit them to
come. So the Sergeant was sent out a second time* and then the Officers would
not permit him to pass, which was entered as a Contempt in the Journal Book,
they being startled at the sudden force upon the House; and therefore they
concluded also, not to proceed in business until their Members should be
restored, and in the mean time ordered, That the General be sent to, that the
House might know the reason of the Armies so proceeding: Which being done, the
General and Council of Officers sending to the House their Reasons which
necessitated them to the Action, and manifesting therein, That there was no
other way to preserve the Rights and Interests of the Nation, which those
Members had labored to destroy: thereupon the House (who of their own
knowledge could tell the particulars charged were true) being earnestly
importuned by the Army, That they would proceed to save the Nation, and secure
the good Cause they had fought for against the King and his Party, chose to
sit, (notwithstanding all the difficulties and clouds of envy that were
gathering over their heads) and to proceed toward the Nations settlement in
such a way as God in his Providence according to his Will, should direct them,
rather than desert their Trusts; not consulting therein with Flesh and Blood
(which because of the hazard of their own personal concernments, might have
taken them off), but with a Good Cause, and the common Good, which then lay at
stake, and had been utterly lost if those Secluded ones might have had their
wills, who now again make it their business, by clamours, to set the world on
fire about their ears, and care not though themselves perish at last in the
combustion.

3. Let us see the Reason why it is, that being once Secluded, they have never
since been admitted, and are still kept out. The Reasons are evident; for they
were no sooner Excluded but they went on Plotting and contriving as a distinct
Assembly, without the House, to carry on their design as they did before
within. To this purpose they joynely put forth a Declaration, Entitled, A
Solemn Protestation against the House and the Army, declaring all void and null
that should be done their absence; and inflamed Mr. Pryn (a necessary Tool of
the Party, because be can say and Print any thing for them, and yet not be in
danger of his head) who put forth in his own name, a violent, virulent
Protestation against the House, the Army, their Cause, and all Proceedings, and
diverse other fierce Papers he has let fly from time to time; so did his Parry
also the like, under the Title of Declarations, etc. And to this day they have
never omitted any occasion they could lay hold on, to justify themselves, and
revive that destructive design, for which they were at first Secluded; this is
enough to show, There was and is reason to keep them out of the House still:
Unless any will imagine it reasonable they should be Readmitted to take an
opportunity, which they can never otherwise have, for the finishing of that
mischief which they (like a sort of Madmen) by restoring the Ejected Family,
would bring not only upon the Parliament and the well-affected, but on all
Parties of men; yea, and themselves in conclusion; as they may sufficiently
perceive, if God gives them hearts to weigh what has been from reason deduced
in the former Sactions. -- But now let us return to our Author again.

He says, This Parliament is no Parliament, because by Law it is Dissolved
through the Kings Death that Called it. So says Mr. Pryn also, and others.
Thus when men are overheated with Prejudice and Passion, they know not, or
remember not, what they say: They affirm, The Parliament dyed together with the
King, and so can no longer have a Being, yet they keep a clamor to get into
the House, and then they will be content it shall be a Living Parliament again,
although the King be Dead, and shall serve the turn, and he ^ed a Full, a Free,
and a Good Parliament; but (you may suppose) to no other purpose but their own.
Why else did William Pryn, and his fellows, make such a stir to get in? And why
does the (...) Pa^er (subscribed G. Booth) intimate. That if the House will let
in the Old Members again, all shall be as well as if it were a new Virgin
Parliament? By th^s the world may plainly see, it is not the Public Interest
of the Nation (though they pretend it) but their own which they seek. If the
seclusion of them be taken off, that they may sit, then it will be as good a
Parliament as it was at first, or as any new one can be: Speak out then, and
say, O House of Parliament, ye shall reign, and we will be content, provided we
may reign with you: And who knows forsooth (if such a bargain could be made)
whether they would not upon those terms leave Charles Stuart to commence his
Reign Ad Graecas Calendas, or Latter-Lammas? But they have more wit than to
believe such a bargain possible; therefore not being able to get into the
House, their best way is to say it is no Parliament, and upon that account keep
up a faction to bring in Charles, and try whether they can reign with him, by
persuading the Nation they are undone; and neither have, nor can have, any
Government without him.

Thus far I have argued this business Argumento ad hominem, that is to say, in
a way of Argumentation good against Mr. William Prynne, and the men of his
party, quatenus Prynne and that party; so that they, above all other men, ought
to hold their tongues: But because it is necessary that both they and the
Cavalier Objectors should be confuted, and that others should be satisfied, and
likewise that the minds of friends should be confirmed, and all men's scruples
be removed touching the legality and equity of this Parliaments sitting, I
shall now descend to handle the question Argumento ad Rem, that is to say, by
an Argument to the purpose, making good the thing it self (as it now stands)
against the world of Malcontents (of what party soever they be) and this I
will do, not by such principles as may be said to be only our own, but from
such as are owned by some of those of the Presbyterian party who appear
opposite to the Parliament, and by others also, Royalists of high reputation
and judgment in the world.

This leads me to make Reply unto what our Author further says, viz. That not
only many of the Members of this Parliament are secluded, but they were first
dissolved by reason of the death of the King that called them, so that legally
they could sit no longer, and at last by the late Protector: Which dissolution
was acknowledged by as many Members against themselves as sat in intermediate
Parliaments. Here you see the utmost that the Cavaliers, and which Mr. Prynne
and the other Malcontents do, or can say against this Parliaments sitting. For
Answer whereunto, give me leave to lay down these Prolegomena or Previous
Positions, which are not points of my own invention, but as well founded upon
the judgment of the learned, as agreeable to my own, which perhaps is but weak.

1. The first Position is drawn from Mr. Baxters own words in his late Book,
entitled, A holy Commonwealth, and I suppose whatever he says, his Brethren
will approve. He, to justify himself for his finding with the Parliaments Arms
against those of the King, declares, That the King by the constitution of the
Kingdom, had the Title of Sovereign, but not so as that the Sovereign Power was
wholly in him; for, that according to the constitution was divided betwixt him
and the Parliament; and so p. 46. he shows, how that in this Kingdom the
Title of Sovereign given to the King was Honorary, and ought not to be
interpreted contrary to the constitution of the Kingdom, which allowed him but
a part only of the Sovereignty. So that though the persons representing the
people in Parliament, were, being taken in their personal condition each of
them but Subjects, yet in respect to the public constitution of the Kingdom,
they revera had one part of that Sovereign Power of Parliament, as the King had
another part, and could really claim no more but his part in the Acts of
Supremacy For proof of this, Mr. Baxter in Page 463, 464, 465, 466. cites the
Kings own Answer to the Nineteen Propositions, and from thence infer that
large his Royal acknowledgment of the truth of this assertion; therefore I
suppose neither the Cavaliers will contradict this, seeing the King
acknowledged it, nor the Presbyterians, because not only Mr. Baxter writes
this, but because also they all engaged in the War upon this principle, for the
Parliament against the King; and questionless, a righteous principle of
engagement it was.

2. This leads me to a second Position, viz. That in a Kingdom where the
Sovereignty is so divided, if the King shall grow insolent, and by Arms seek to
invade that part of the Sovereignty which belongs to the people in Parliament,
he may by arms be lawfully opposed. For proof of this, Mr. Baxter because he
would now be courteous with the Cavaliers and win them, cites the judgments of
two the most learned Royalists that this later Age has produced, viz. Barclay
and Grotius; which citations being large, I for brevities sake omit them; only
one out of Grotius give me leave to repeat in English, because it has the full
sense of the rest: It is this, [ If the Authority be divided betwixt a King and
the People in Parliament, so that the King has one part of is, the people
another, the King offering to encroach upon that part which is none of his, may
lawfully be opposed by Arms, because be exceeds the bounds of his Authority.
And not only so, but he may lose his own part likemise by the Law of Arms.]

3. The third Position is That a King carrying on a War upon such terms against
the people, to the death and destruction of his people while they are
contending for their right, remain no longer a King, having dissolved the
constitution of the Kingdom, but has lost his Kingdom, and becoms an enemy,
and a private person. For proof of this against the Cavaliers, Barclay, the
great Champion of Monarchy, in his Book Contra Monarchomacos, does grant it,
only he says, Vix videtur id accidere posse in Rege meni is compote, It seems
almost impossible a King should be so mad as to proceed on that manner; and yet
we all know who was so mad as to do it: And for further proof of it, both
against Cavaliers and Malecontented Presbyterians together, the same Mr. B. in
Page 483. tells us, That Grotius and other learned Politicians conclude, That
if a King shall thus make himself an enemy of the people, engaging in War
against them, he deposes himself, and may be used by them as (...) enemy.

4. The Fourth Position is, That the constitution of the Kingdom being by this
means dissolved, and the Nation put into a state of War, being divided into two
parties, these two parties, though really they make but one Nation, yet during
the War, they are no longer to be reckoned as one Nation, but as two Nations
contending for distinct Rights. So says Mr. Baxters Royal friend Grotius in
his Tract De Legatis.

5. The Fifth Position is, That if while the War lasts, the two parties are
to be reputed two Nations, then the Rights and Laws of War do belong unto
either party against the other, as absolutely as they can belong unto one
Nation against another, when they are at War. Besides that this is confessed,
the Reason is evident, because no War can be managed or regulated, unless Jura
belli* the Laws of War be admitted for the direction and decision of matters
relating to the Warlick occasion and Controversy The state of War has its
known Laws among the Nations, as well as the Civil state of a Kingdom or
Commonwealth has known Laws in its particular Nation, whereby matters of
difference are to be ended. This is a confessed point; Why else are so many
Books extant touching the Laws of War?

The main point of the Soveraignties being divided heretofore betwixt the King
and the Parliament, and acknowledged to be so by the King himself, and the
other Positions premised being proved by the Testimonies of such as are
reverenced by both Royalists and Presbyterians, I trust then, that by building
upon Foundations of their own, I shall give both of them satisfaction in the
Building, and be able to convince them that there is both Law and Reason for
the sitting of this Parliament.

As to the grand Argument which both our Author, Mr. Pryn, and others do use,
that according to Law the Parliament was dissolved by the Kings death; It Is
true, that it was so provided by Law, that the death of a King dissolved a
Parliament; but you are to observe, that this was a Law relating to the
Constitution of Parliament in the ordinary Course of its regulation, and
respecting only the formality of the Writ, summoning the Parliament to advise
with the particular person of the King in whose name the writ was issued forth;
and truly when the old Constitution remained without disturbance, it was reason
it should be retained in its ordinary Course; but in an extraordinary case, as
that of this Parliament has been in all the great revolutions from first to
last; when the very Constitution Parlamentary it self, as to the nature of the
Powers and Rights of the several parties King and people therein concerned,
fell under Question, and when the sword was drawn betwixt the parties to decide
it, and the King persisted to claim the whole Right of Sovereignty contrary to
that ancient Constitution, and referred his Claim to the determination of the
sword, and thereby according to the equity of our sundamental Laws, sorfeited
his Kingship, and became a private person, dissolved the Constitution of the
Kingdom, introduced another Law, viz. the Law of Arms, to try his Cause by,
and pleaded it with sword in hand to the very last, is it reason in such an
extraordinary Case of this, that the surviving party of that King should ground
an Argument upon the formalities and ordinary usages of a Constitution, whenas
that Constitution it self has by the King himself been dissolved long ago?
what legal or rational Plea can now be made upon the account of his Regal
capacity, who, by proceeding contrary to the very Law and nature of the
Constitution upon which he stood, justly lost all the Benefit of it, and became
a private person, and having made himself an enemy to the people, deposed
himself (as Mr. Baxter tells you out of Grotius) and therefore might be used as
an enemy? with what face (I say) can any man after all this talk of Law in
relation to him, who had not only violated all Law in the Branches, but plucked
up the very root of it in destroying the Parlamentary establishment of the
Kingdom, as much as in him lay, and would refer himself to no Law but (as I
said before) the Law of war? Let the impartial part of the world then, yea,
and our Adversaries themselves, from their own very doctrines here cited, be
Judges.

The consideration of these particulars may serve sufficiently to clear

1. The justice of secluding those Members, who in endeavoring to bring the
King (after all) to the Throne again, made themselves Criminals, because they
would by treachery have betrayed the whole Sovereignty, contrary to the
Fundamental Law of the Constitution, into his hands; which Seclusion is to be
justified, not only by the Law of Necessity (as they pleaded that acted it) but
by the Law of the Land, which might have called them to account for their
lives, and also by the Law of Nations, which in such case as this allows the
victorious part of the People to create a new Law for another Constitution of
Government.

2. This shows the sufficiency of that Authority which brought the late King
to Justice. According to the Royal and Presbyterian doctrins, he made himself a
private person, as well as a public Enemy; therefore having shed so much blood
and done so many mischiefs deserving death, he might legally, being a private
man, be put to his Trial according to Law, for lesser Crimes, as well as for
that transcendent Crime of dissolving the Fundamental Constitution of the
Kingdom, by warring for the whole Sovereignty in himself.

3. This shows (as is hinted before) the Legality of the remaining
Parliaments sitting to form a new Government; for, though they were but a part
of the Parliament heretofore, yet being the only ones that remained faithful to
the Peoples Quarrel against their Enemy the King, and the former Government
having been (as the forecited Authors confess) dissolved by the King himself,
certainly the Law of God, the Law of Nature, and the Law of the Land intending
there should be some Government, and the Law of War (which the King himself
brought in) having transmitted the Sovereign Power into their hands for the
People, they by all manner of Laws are avowed to be the Supreme Authority and
Parliament of England, and therefore legally qualified to sit, to secure and
settle a new Fundamental Law of Government (such as may be most convenient) for
the Nation. Which being once done, it becomes as valid de Jure, (that is to
say, as Legal) as the former form of Government ever was.

But because you shall not depend upon my single Inference, you shall have one
or two more Testimonies from Mr. Baxter's friend Grotius. He says, if the
Prevailing party had no other Law but the Law of Necessity, it might serve well
enough to justify such a Proceeding; Necessit as summa reducit res ad merum
Jus Naturae, Grot. de Jure Belli, l. 2. cap. 6. And in his Prolegomena he
says, In beslo Civili, scripta quidem Jura, etc. In a Civil war, written Laws,
that is, the established Laws of a Nation, are of no force, but those only
which are not written, that is, which are agreeable to the Dictates of Nature,
or the Law and Custom of Nations, and then that only is to be admitted Law
which shall be settled by the Prevailing party: Jus dicitur esse id quod
validiori placuit, ut intelligamus fine suo carere Jus, nisi vires ministras
habeat; the English whereof is, That only which it pleases the stronger party
to ordain, is said to be Law, since it cannot accomplish the end of a Law,
except it be attended by Force to constrain obedience. And as to the particular
Case of the secluded Members, he has one saying which hits our purpose right:
Si qui jure suo uti non possunt, eorum jus accrescit praesentibus, l. 2. c. 5.
His business in that part of the Chapter is, to discourse about the Major Vote
in Senates or grand Assemblies, and concludes, That in case the greater number
be absent, or if there be any cause that they may not use their Right there,
then the whole Right accrueth to them that are present or remain sitting. What
cause there was for the secluding of these Members, I think you have
sufficiently seen in the beginning of this Section; They had joined issue in
Interest and design with the Royal party and the King, who (according to what
has been already conceded) was a public Enemy: So also did the House of
Lords, who likewise lost all Right that they could pretend to, by compliance
with the same Interest and design. For, seeing by the Equity of all Laws,
Accessaries are as punishable as the Principal in a Crime, therefore by the Law
of War (it being a Law of their own introducing, and no other Law remaining to
be Judge in the Case) both They and the secluded Members, for adhering to the
Conquered party, even after the Victory, might have been proceeded against in
capital manner, but were favorably as well as justly dealt with, in being
deprived only of their Interest in the House, whenas their heads might have
been required; and so the whole Supreme Authority descended lawfully to those
Members that now remain.

But here some may interpose, and say, We imagined and expected that the Laws
of the Land should be maintained, and Free Parliaments, but this doctrine talks
of the longest sword and a Prevailing party, maintaining that the strongest
must carry it; which is the way to lay a ground for, and to encourage disorders
and confusions, so that they which can get uppermost by force, are still to be
justified by the same Rule. This language, I know, is frequently in the mouths
of the undiscerning sort, yea and of some too who think themselves very wise.

That I may make some Return to this sort of people, and instruct them well,
they must learn first to distinguish between Force used without good cause, and
an use of Force upon a just cause or occasion; Also betwixt the exercise of
force by such as have a Right of war, and by those who have it not; Also,
betwixt the Nation in a State of War, and the Nation in a State of Peace;
Lastly, betwixt the Laws which are fundamental to the Form or Constitution it
self of a Government, and the Laws Municipal, which concern the Rights,
Liberties and Privileges of a People under the same Government.

I. Seeing that to all Sword-engagements a good Cause is requisite, then none
can hereafter take example or occasion from this rational discourse, to have
recourse to the sword, and afterward to improve it as this Parliament did,
unless they shall be able to ground the undertaking, as they did, upon
righteous principles, which have been acknowledged such (as you read before)
even by Royalists and Presbyterians themselves, nor unless they shall have the
same just reasons to make use of the Law of War (which in such Case becomes
the Law of all Nations) to proceed to a final Arbitration of the Quarrel,
after that the Adversaries themselves have admitted it, and rendered the ending
of the Contest, both impractcable and impossible by any Law of the Nation.

II. Those who intend to use the Sword, or the Law of War, cannot lawfully do
it, unless they can rightly claim Jus Belli, and have a Right to that Law, as
the Parliament had, when the King grasping at the whole Sovereignty, they were
necessitated to desend that part of it which by the National Constitution
belonged unto themselves; as has already been confessed by both sorts of
Adversaries.

III. Consider, this can afford no matter of Argument for Rebellions and
Insurrections; for if in such a contest of War as this was in England, the
Parliament had a right to War, the King having occasioned the Nation to be in a
state of War, it does not therefore follow, that in the state of peace, private
persons, or any number of persons less qualified than a Parliament, should
presume to do what a Parliament might do, either in, or out of a state of War;
or that a part of a Parliament should hereafter take upon them to make War, and
exclude their Fellow Members and then exercise the whole Supremacy, without and
against the consent of those Members, unless the great Platonic year shall
revolve and revive the like Causes, Occasions, and Circumstances of Acting, and
the same Treachery also in Fellow Members for betraying the Supreme power into
the hands of some third party, or single person. In the like extraordinary
Case, the like proceeding may lawfully be again, but not otherwise; for, when
after a Civil War, a Government is once again established in peace, all men and
powers are to steer their course of acting by the ordinary Laws and Rules of
the Constitution.

IV. As touching the great Objection about our Laws, consider, that though the
old Fundamental which respects the former Form or Constitution of Government,
be altered, yet the other ancient Laws Municipal, which concern our Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, and Properties, do remain entire unto the generality of
the Nation (and they might be more sensible of the truth of this, did not the
designs of disturbers hinder the complete enjoyment) or else will shortly be
settled entire in that state of Freedom which the Parliament is once again
struggling for against the common enemy. It is brutish therefore, to clamor and
cry out, that the Laws of the Land are not maintained, when as only the Law of
that form of Government is abolished, together with the Prerogative of the
King, Privilege of Peers, and the like, which were but the excrescencies of
Arbitrary power, which had (in a great measure) overgrown, not only the Laws
Municipal, concerning our Rights, Liberties and Properties, but exceeded also
by usurpation, the bounds of that very Law of the Kingdoms Constitution, upon
which King and Peers themselves had a standing, and were to stand. To sum up
all in a word, the people have, or (if they would be pleased to settle) may and
will more sensibly have their old Laws to be governed by, only all the harm
done is, That for the former Constitution or Form of Government, they have in
their reach (and partly in possession) a better, viz. A Fundamental
Constitutional Law of Freedom, lawfully purchased by this Parliament, and by
them ready to be settled unto us, and our Children after us.

There remain two Objections more used by our Author, and Mr. Prynne, and other
Malcontents, First, That this Parliament was actually dissolved by the
Protector. No such matter, Vltra Pesse non est Esse, he had no power to do it,
therefore it could not be done by him. But you will say, We saw he had power
that actually enabled him to effect the dissolution.

To this I Answer, A Dissolution it could not be, but (as now it is called) it
is rightly termed only An Interruption of its sitting; for, in matter of power
by Law, the Lawyers know well enough, it is a sure Maxim, Id solum p^ssum quod
jure possum, i. e. That a man can do nothing that is valid, but only what he
does according to Law. Now then, if the Protectors Act of turning out the
Parliament were a valid Dissolution, it must have been so by some Law; and that
Law must be either some Law of the Nation that enabled him to do it, or else it
must be the Law of War. As to the former, it is evident he had no Law of the
Nation to justify the Action; and so, if any Law, it is that of War which must
make it good. Now that he could not do it by the Law of War, is evident
likewise, because his Military capacity was derived from the Parliament, they
(who had the whole Right of War in themselves) having given him his Commission
to Militate for them (that is to say, for the people represented by them) and
so he could not properly or lawfully Militate or use a Right of War against
them, who had no lawful power but what he derived from them; whereby it being
evident he could make no Legal Dissolution of them, Ergo, By Law
(notwithstanding him) the Parliament remains in being, and the Soldiery having
withdrawn the force that was over it, it follows without straining, That
having never been lawfully dissolved, they remain legally the same Parliament
they were before.

Secondly, But there is a further Objection yet to be dispatched, which is,
That many of the Members of this House having sat intermediate Parliaments
called by the Protector, have thereby acknowledged this House was dissolved by
him.

1. The Answer to this is naturally consecutive to the former, viz. that seeing
the Parliament was still in Being, being only suspended for a time from the
exercise of the supreme power, then all that was done in pursuance thereupon in
reference to the exercise of supremacy, must in Law be void and null, and the
intervening space of time be reputed as a great Chasma, a praeternatural
vacuity or dead Interval, wherein all the Acts of snpremacie, and matters
relatiug thereto, that were used, became legally defunct as soon as they were
done, coming into the world still-born; and so those Intervening Assemblies of
the people, not having had the legal Force and virtue of Parliaments, they are
now properly called Conventions for distinction sake. Besides as they were
nothing in Law of themselves (being creatures of another extraction) so he who
created them by his own Power, presently uncreated them to their first nothing,
because as he was a man of high courage and great spirit, he could not endure
to see the work of his own hands rise up and dispute (as he conceived) against
him

2. As to the sitting of some Members of the present Parliament in those
intermediate Conventions, They did it, not as owning them for legal
Parliaments, but sat only in respect to the Interest of the people, who
Originally and Fundamentally always had and have a Right to meet to consult
for common Good; and if being under a Force, they be hindered that they cannot
do it as they ought and as they would, yet it always concerns them to do it
as they can, and as they find Opportunity; upon this Account some of the
Members did sit in those Conventions, with intent to have made use of those
Opportunities God did put into their hands for the Public, yet without any
further respect to the Power assumed to call them, than a mere appearance: For,
in the first Convention, they presently fell to claiming their Right in the
behalf of the people, and so they did in all the following Conventions; for
which cause seclusions were used against them. But some will say, if they did
not own the Power, and those to be Parliaments, why did they complain so much
of their being then secluded, as an Infringement of the Peoples Right in
Parliament? The Answer of this is rear of kind to the former; their Complaint
concerning breach of privilege, was not grounded upon supposition of any Right
or privilege of sitting derived unto them from the Protectors writ of summons
(for, they were always so far from acknowledging him, that they kept on foot
a Continual Claim, and thereupon opposed him to the utmost of their Power) but
their Complaint of violation was grounded only upon that general Right inherent
in the people, which is, if they cannot meet in a regular way, then (as I said
before) to do it as they can, and as they find opportunity for asserting their
own Rights; and so upon this Account it is, that being forced away from the
meeting they might well complain; that complaining must be construed to be an
effect of the sense they had of the injury done to that general Right of the
Peoples meeting, rather than a sign of any acknowledgment of the Protectors
power, or of those Meetings to be Parliaments.

Lastly, What if some Members of the present Parliament had acknowledged, or
did acknowledge the power, summoning them to meet, and those meetings to be
Parliaments? yet that could be no prejudice to the whole Body of this
Parliament now sitting, because a Body of Men remaining all in equal power and
right, cannot be concluded by particular Acts done by some of their own number
without consent of the rest; yea, if all of them at once had sat in any one of
those Meetings, yet sitting there but as an integral part of a Meeting, and not
as a distinct Assembly, nor as the same entire House of Parliament that they
were before their Interruption; therefore nothing of this nature which they or
any of them have done in other Conventions, since their Interruption, can be
said to be an Act done in their Free State Parliamentary capacity* because that
belongs only to their whole House and so the sitting and acting of some part
of them, cannot be interpreted Tantamount to a voluntary Dissolution of this
their Supreme Assembly.

This being done, I might now fall upon the Adversaries other Objections from
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and the Covenant and by Inferences drawn
from their own principles here* cited in this Section, confute all their
pretenses grounded upon those Oaths, etc. But because I have been already very
much larger then at first I intended, let this one general Inference serve the
turn, viz. That the Constitution of the Kingdom being extinct through the Kings
own default, in relation to which only (as Mr. Baxter says at the latter end
of the same Book) we were by our several Obligations concerned to have respect
to him while he kept within his Bounds; and a new Constitution of Government
being now lawfully introduced (as has been proved,) then (as may be collected
out of the Royal Doctor Sanderson's Book De Juramento) the Alteration being
carried to such a height, that neither the same person nor things are in being,
which I swear to maintain, the former Oaths are at an end, and the Obligation
cease. And that this may be confirmed by one Witness more, take in Grotius
also, who lib. 2 de Jur. bell. cap. 13. says, An oath binds no longer, if the
quality or condition of him to whom I swear, be altered: As for example, if he
that was a Magistrate cease to be a Magistrate; as he must needs do (say I) who
lays claim to an old form of Government, after it and his own pretension is
lawfully extinguished, and another lawfully introduced in its place: which is
the thing already sufficiently proved by the preceding parts of this Section;
and so all former Obligations to the late King and his Heirs become, upon that
account, utterly void.

SECT. VIII.
Of the City of London.

LOndon, the Metropolis and Imperial Chamber of England! she has always been
zealous and famous for the maintenance of Religion and Liberty; and if we look
but twenty years backward, and consider what vast sums of money she has
disbursed upon that account* how liberal she has been of her own Blood in
marching forth, and what bodies of men she has sent abroad; how diligent and
active, how resolute and constant she has stood, in asserting the Cause
Parliamentary, through various revolutions, to this present season, against the
late King and his party; and how victorious (by Gods own arm of Salvation) she
has been on the behalf of the Commonwealth, I may without flattery say* the
Records of no City this day in Europe can in so short a time show more Triumphs
of Honor, or greater Trophies of Renown than she; and all these won from that
Malignant and implacable party, who, whatever they may pretend, (both head and
tail of them) do for these things most perfectly remember you, and look not on
this or that party of men among you, but eye and hate your City quatenus
London; London, that first beat them out of their Estates, and then took them
into their own hands either upon Morgagemoney lent, or upon Purchase-money paid
to enable them to pay their Compositions to the State; London, that began the
War, as the King said, and threatened them for it in his Declarations; but
though in this I am able to acquit them, yet the Cavaliers, in reverence to
their old Master will believe no body but him. They could not be so often
tippling from time to time in your City, but you must needs have heard (when the
Wine was in) all these things (with Curses to boot) belched out concerning you.
Which being so, take heed least fits of the Spleen transport any part of you
beyond your selves, to give an ear to them that with fair words (working upon
discontent) do seek to ensnare you. Can London City think to thrive, while his
Son shall fit upon the Throne, whose Father over and over declared it to be the
beginner of the War?

Look into his Papers and Declarations in the Book of Collections, how he
charge your City all along to be the place from whence the tumults sprang*
which (he says) forced him to go away from Whitehal, because while he was
there, he was in Danger of his Life (if we way believe him) and that out of the
City the Five Members were guarded with Multitudes of armed men, and
Ammunition, in a hostile and warlike manner to Westminster; And how that near a
hundred Lighters and long Boats were set out by water* laden with Sacres,
Murdering-pieces, and other Ammunition dressed up with M^stclothes, and
Streamers, as ready for Fight, and (says the Declaration) they by water passed
by our Windows as Whitehal, and scornfully asked, what was become of Us (to wit
the King) and whether we were gone? Also, in another Declaration, he sets
forth, how the City and their Lord Mayor sent forth their Myrmidons to assault
and terrify the Members of both Houses whose Opinions they liked not. In
another Declaraion he proclaims, that such of his Subjects as were dutiful
and faithful to him, and labored for Peace, were reviled, injured and murdered
even by the Magistrates of THAT CITY, or by their directions; In other
Declarations he said to this effect, that if they repented not then, they ought
to look for no Favor; therein intimating, that a Revenge was due from him unto
the City, if they proceeded any further. Page. 72. of that Book he signifies,
that the pride and power of the city was the means made use of to undo the
Kingdom. And in his Letter to the City of London, dated from York, he tells
them that if they did not then complie with him he was resolved to proceed
(when he should be able) against the several Companies of the City (as opposers
of his Authority) in the must exemplary way, AND QVESTION THE CHARTER OF THE
CITY. If these things were threatened when the Cursed Cow had short Horns, what
then may ye expect from his Son, and that party, if they (through the folly of
any of you) should gain power into their hands?

Secondly, If not for your own sakes, yet for Religions sake, take heed what ye
do. Ye have been (I know) a Religious zealous people, and upon that account ye
were hated in the days of the Court; take heed that none of you be blinded by
mistaken Zeal, as well as passion, to run upon your own ruin; read over the
First, Second and Third Sections once again, and look before you leap seeing
your Religion stands upon a precipice as well as your selves, if the young man
get in, who is heir to the principles as well as the pretensions of his family:
And what a friend that Family has been to Religion, and its Professors is
worthy of your most serious consideration If*we view them in their English
Extraction, the Book of Martyrs will tell you how the Sluices of Blood were
opened by King Henry and his Daughter Mary* If we look on the Scottish side, it
is sad to consider, how much blood was spilt by her of the House of Lorraine,
who was our King James his Grandmother She being gone, her Daughter (King James
his Mother Mary* a fierce Papist) succeeded, who after she had massacred her
own Husband (the Father of James) by poison, Gunpowder, and halter, for the
love she bare to Davie and Earl Bothwel (her Adulterers) persecuted all of the
Reformed Religion, endeavored to poison James her own Son, shed blood likewise
by raising Civil War at home against her Protestant Subjects, and conspired
with foreign Papists to destroy Queen Elizabeth: For all which God found her
out, and gave her a due reward by the loss of her head in Fotheringay Castle.
The next was King JAMES, who wrote his Beati Pacifici in blood too: For, to say
nothing of the death of Overbury, which blood he took upon himself by pardoning
the Murderers, nor of that of Raleigh (merely to serve a turn of State) it is
well known his son Henry came to an untimely death; and though it be not
directly known by what hand he was taken away, yet (as a late Historian
observes) there was a strange connivence, and little mourning at Court after it
was done. To these may be added (not unjustly) the Blood of the poor
Protestants in Germany, which must be laid upon the score of that Family; for,
had K. James performed the duty of a good Protestant, or a loving Father, he
might (if he had pleased) have presently stopped the Issue that ran there 30
years together. I might insist likewise upon his son the late Kings betraying
the Protestant Cause also in Germany, and throughout France, especially at
Rochel, where, under a fained pretense of assisting the Protestants with ships,
etc. he gave order to his shipping to serve on the contrary side, to the utter
ruin of that Cause and Party in France, and the loss of many gallant
English-men's lives by him exposed to destruction; for, when Buckingham was
questioned for it in Parliament, the King himself, to signify to all the
world, that what his Favorite had done was by his own approbation, stepped
between the Duke and the Parliament, and so took the guilt of all upon himself:
All which most treacherous Actions toward them of our Religion abroad, were in
those days, and have been ever since, resented by all the Protestants
throughout Europe, and the present exclusion of that Family is looked on now by
the most pious of the Nations round about, as a just recompense (which they
have long expected) to fall from the hand of God upon the Family, for the
Treachery of their Fathers toward his Church and people. But that which exceeds
all comparison, is their guilt in reference to the barbarous Massacre in
Ireland. No more of this, but that it cannot be imagined, any Religious man who
has heard of these things, should imbarque himself with such a Family, the
guilt whereof has hitherto sunk all the partakers I might likewise add the
Negotiations of the Young man (that now is) with the Pope by his Agents at
Rome, (Copies whereof I have by me in Italian, Latin, and French, and shall in
due time publish them.)

Thirdly, if Religion cannot move ye, what think ye of your Liberties, and the
Nations Liberties? Promises are but Baits that may draw you to the Net. The
Chronicles will tell you, that when K. John had granted Magna Charta and Charta
Forestae, because he could not help it, and 25 persons were chosen as Trustees
for the people in the Government, yet the King after a short time, worm'd them
out of all power, and undid all that he had done before, and was revenged at
last upon them all. The like misery fell out by trusting Henry the Third, who
having warred with his people, they got the better one while, and the another,
and these vicissitudes were frequent betwixt them; and all that the people
gained by trusting him was the better learning of this Lesson, Put no
confidence in Princes; for at every turn, no sooner did he by subtilty get the
Power, but he fell heavy upon those that had opposed him, especially the
Londoners, whose Charter he called in, and all his days after made them
examples of his vengeance; the like he did to the other Corporations. So
Richard the second, because the Londoners had opposed him, as soon as he got
opportunity* he cusrtailed their privileges, and placed continual marks of
his displeasure upon them. I need not instance, how near Edward the First was
to have burned the City upon the same account, after he had plagued it over and
over, because I would not be tedious in particularising these, or in citing
other Instances out of our own stories; which every one may read at leisure.

Fourthly, admit that Charles himself would be (of his own inclination) better
than his Predecessors, yet his party are hungry, and will not be satisfied: And
he having occasion to use them, must not deny them their pleasure, but must
(above all things) keep his own party in heart, else they will not be firm to
him, and so he may be exposed to danger from all other parties, whom it will be
his Interest to hold under, that they may never be in condition again to lift
him out of the saddle. No doubt but he and they will remember his Fathers words
in a particular manner, [ The pride and power of the City of London.]

Fifthly, as to the pretended Title of this young man, pray you what is it? It
will be found upon search, like all the rest of the Titles founded upon
usurpation, one after another, since the Conquest. If we look up to Henry the
Seventh, its original, there will be little cause to admire it; for, he only
descended from a Bastard of John of Gaunt, who, though ligitimated for Common
Inheritances, yet was expressly excluded by Law from Succession to the Crown:
And as for his Wives Title, you know he never thought that worth the using; and
yet from this spurious slip of the Lancastrian Root it was, that King James
derived his Claim, and that but collaterally or at Second Hand, being (in
effect) a mere Stranger in blood to the English; whereupon we may justly
wonder, what Policy guided this Nation in those days, when it so strangely
bowed down its Neck to the Yoke of a Stranger. But, admit this Title had been
without Flaws in its derivation, yet this Man's Fathers Treasons and his own
(as is proved in the former Section) have most deservedly caused the cutting
off the Entaile. Besides, it is evident, what a Governor for you this Pretender
would prove, who sucked in his Fathers Principles with his Mothers milk, has
been bred up under the Wings of Prelacie and Popery, and as he sucked both
breasts heretofore, so he hangs upon them both at this very day; One who from
the beginning was engaged against the Cause of the Commonwealth, and your City,
and who has the same Counselors his Father had (besides a more intimate
acquaintance acquired beyond Sea with the Jesuits) to remember him both of the
old Design, and the ways to effect it; one who has been bedabled in the Blood
of England, Scotland and Ireland, and has both his Father's and his own Scores
to clear out of your Purses, and has long made it his Business to cajole and
cheat all parties, in hope thereby to get in upon us, with a desperate Rabble
at his heels* to execute his Revenges. What shall we say then of such men, that
now make shipwreck of their own Principles, to seek to let him in, and would be
opening sluices of blood out of their Countrymen and nearest Relations, for the
Interest of their own and the public Enemy?

Lastly, as to what concerns your Trade, its easy to guess what will become of
that, when it shall be counted Reason of State to keep you poor and low. For
the inference is ready at hand for him; viz. That if the Father complained of
Pride and Power in you, and has recorded that from thence proceeded the first
Causes of his ruin, then the son is concerned to pull down your pride, (if I
may use the Royal phrase) and hold a strong hand over you. And how do you think
Trade can thrive upon his restitution? when (as you may read in the third,
fourth and fifth Sections) there will be a necessity of trebling Taxes, and
perpetuating of them past remedy, to maintain another kind of Army than we
have now, to tame dissenting Parties, and to keep the Nation in an asinine
posture of submission to bear all burdens that shall be laid either upon the
Estate or the Conscience, by the Lords of the Court, and the Lordanes of
Episcopacie. As Trade therefore is the particular Interest of your City, so be
wary, that the want of it at present do not irritate you to fall out with the
public Interest of your Country; but remember, that it being once settled,
Trade and all other Concernments will soon flourish again; and that the way to
settlement must be (as our Author well said) by giving satisfaction to all
parties, which (as I have before manifested from his own words) cannot be
expected from C Stuart and his party, but may and will be easily had from the
way of a free Commonwealth; so that all we have to do is, to stick close to
the Parliament, that they may be enabled to establish it, and employ our utmost
to keep him out, because otherwise war will follow, and that will inevitably
bring on a destruction of Trade, with the ruin of Religion, Liberty, and your
Renowned City; All which may prosper, if ye please: It Is you that have given
all this Pail of good Milk; and what a thing would it be, that any of you
should aim to kick it down in the dirt!

-- En quo discordia Cives Perducet miseros! -- Westminster, Aug. 12. 1669.
FINIS.

