The EXCELLENCY OF A Free State: OR, The Right CONSTITUTION OF A Commonwealth.

WHEREIN All Objections are answered, and the best way to secure the Peoples
LIBERTIES, discovered: WITH Some Errors of Government, AND Rules of Policy.

Published by a Well-wisher to Posterity.

London, Printed for Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles near the West End of
Paul's. 1656.

To the Reader.
TAking notice of late with what impudence, and (the more is the pity)
confidence, the Enemies of this Commonwealth in their public Writings and
Discourses labor to undermine the dear-bought Liberties and Freedoms of the
People, in their declared Interest of a Free State; I thought it high time, by
counterworking them, to crush the Cockatrice in the Egg, that so it might never
grow to be a Bird of prey: in order thereto, I have published this following
Discourse to the World; that so the Eyes of the People being opened, they may
see whether those high and ranting Discourses of personal Prerogative and
unbounded Monarchy, (especially Inspections.
One lately published by Mr. Howel, that struts abroad with a brazen Face) or a
due and orderly succession of the Supreme Authority in the hands of the Peoples
Representatives, will best secure the Liberties and Freedoms of the People from
the Encroachments and Usurpations of Tyranny, and answer the true Ends of the
late Wars.

This Treatise is not intended for a particular Answer to Mr. Howel's said
Book, but yet may obviate that part thereof which he calls, Some Reflexes upon
Government: for his main design is not so much, (though that be part) to
asperse the long Parliament, (and so through their sides to wound all their
Friends and Adherents) as to lay a Foundation for absolute Tyranny, upon an
unbounded Monarchy: and in order thereunto, he advises his Highness to lay
aside Parliaments, (or at best, to make them Ciphers) and to govern the Nation
Vi and Armis: not ^ut of any Honor or respect he bears to his Person, but to
bring the old Interest and Family into more credit and esteem with the People.

His Principles and Precedents, they are purely his own: for I am confident,
that the most considerate part of those that did engage for the late King, are
so far from owning his Tenets, that they would rather lay aside the Family and
Interest of the Stuarts, and declare for a Free State, than endure to be yoked
and enslaved by such an absolute Tyranny as he pleads for* My reason is this:
because most of the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation have fair Estates of
their own, free, without any dependence upon the Crown; and they would be as
unwilling to render up their Estates and Posterities in the paw of the Lion, as
the Commoners themselves.

His Precedents are as false as his Principles are bad: for proof hereof, take
one (and that a main one) for all: he says, That until the Reign of Henry the
first, the Commons of England were not called to the Parliament at all, or had
so much as a Consent in the making of Laws.

To prove that this is false, there is extant an old Latin Copy speaking of a
Parliament in the Reign of King Ethelred; which tells us, that in it were
Universi Anglorum Optimates Ethelredi Regis Edicto: and convocata Plebis
multitudine collectae Regis Edicto: A Writ of Summons for all the Lords, and
for choice of the Commons: a full and clear Parliament. My Author says, The
proofs of Parliaments, in Canute's time, are so many, and so full, that they
tire us altogether. His remarkable Letter from Rome, recorded by the Monk of
Malmsbury, runs thus: To the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Primatibus and toti
Genti Anglorum, tam Nobilibus, quam Plebeis. Hoveden is full in this also;
Cujus (Edmundi) post mortem, Rex Canutus omnes Episcopos, Duces, nec non and
Principes, cunctosque Optimates Gentis Angliae, Lundoniae congregrari jussit.
Howel says William the Conqueror first brought the word Parliament
A clear summons of Parliament: and the very name of Parliament is found (says
my Author) in his time, in the old Book of Edmunds-Bury. Rex Canutus, Anno
Regni 5. cunctos Regni sui Praelatos, Proceresque, ac Magnates, and suum
convocans Parliamentum. And that it was a full Parliament, we may believe, from
the persons we find there, at the Charter to that Monastery; confirmed by
Hardicanute, but granted by Canute, insuo Publico Parliamento, praesistentibus
personaliter in eodem Archi-Episcopis, Episcopis, Suffraganeis, Ducibus,
Comitibus* Abbatibus, cum quam plurimis gregariis Militibus (Knights of shires
it seems) and cum Populi multitudine copiosa (other Commons also) Omnibus tum
eodem Parliamento personaliter existentibus. Edward the Confessor refers the
repairing Mr. Howel would have his Highness lay a Sesment for the repairing of
Paul's without consent of Parliament.
of Westminster to the Parliament: at length, cum totius Regni Electione, (they
are his own words) he sets upon the decayed Minster.

But they that would know more of the Customs and Constitutions of this Nation,
let them repair to those large Volumes, that are so frequent in print upon that
Subject; especially that excellent Piece, The Rights of the Kingdom. This may
suffice to prove that the Commons were called to Parliament long before Henry
the first.

I believe none will be offended with this following Discourse, but those that
are Enemies to public welfare: let such be offended still: it is not for their
sakes that I publish this exsuing Treatise; but for your sakes, that have been
noble Patriots, Fellow Soldiers; and Sufferers for the Liberties and Freedoms
of your Country, that Posterity in after-ages may have something to say and
show to (if God shall permit any) suceeding Tyrants, wherefore their Fathers
sacrificed their lives, and all that was dear to them: It was not to destroy
Magistracy, but to regulate it; nor to confound Propriety, but to enlarge it:
that the Prince as well as the People might be governed by Law; that Justice
might be impartially distributed without respect of persons; that England might
become a quiet Habitation for the Lion and the Lamb to lie down and f^ed
together; and, that none might make the people afraid: it was for these things
they fought and died; and that not as private persons neither, but by the
public command and conduct of the Supreme Power of the Nation, viz. the
peoples Representatives in Parliament: and nothing will satisfy far all the
Blood and Treasure that has been spilt and spent, make England a glorious
Commonwealth, and stop the mouths of all gainsayers; but a due and orderly
succession of the Supreme Authority in the hands of the Peoples Representatives.

An INTRODUCTION TO THE Following Discourse.
WHen the Senators of R^me, in their public Decrees and Orations, began to
comply with and court the People, calling them Lords of the world; how easy a
matter was it then for Gracchus to persuade them to un-Lord the Senate? In like
manner, when Athens was quitted of Kings, the Power was no sooper declared to
be in the People ^^t immediately they took it, and made sure of it in their own
hands, by the advice of Solon, that excellent Lawgiver: for, as Cicero says,
There is a natural desire of Power and Sovereignty in every man: so that if any
have once an opportunity to seize, they seldom neglect it; and if they are told
it is their due, they venture life and all to attain it.

If a People once conceive they ought to be free, this conception is
immediately put in practice; and they free themselves. Their first care is to
see, that their Laws; their Rights, their Deputies, their Officers, and all
their Dependents, be settled in a state of freedom. This becoms like the Apple
of the eye; the least grain, atome, or touch, will grieve it: it is an espoused
virgin; they are extreme jealous over it.

Thus strangely affected were the Roman people, that if any one among them
(though never so deserving) were found to aspire, they presently fetched him
down, as they did the gallant Maelius and Manlius; yea, their jealousy was so
great, that they observed every man's looks, his very nods, his garb, and his
gate, whether he walked, conversed, and lived as a friend of Freedom among his
neighbors. The supercilious eye, the lofty brow, and the grand paw, were
accounted Monsters, and no Character of Freedom; so that it was the special
care of the wiser Patriots, to keep themselves in a demure and humble posture,
for the avoiding of suspicion. Hence it was, that Collatinus, one of their
Freedoms Founders, and of the first Consuls, living in some more State than
ordinary, and keeping at too great a distance from the people, soon taught them
to forget his former merits: insomuch, that they not only turned him out of
his Consulship, but quite out of the City into Banishment. But his Colleague
Brutus, and that wise Man Valerius Publicola, by taking a contrary course,
preserved themselves and their reputation. For, the one sacrificed his
Children, those living Monuments of his House, to make the vulgar amends for an
injury* the other courted them with the Title of Majesty, laid the Fasces, the
Ensigns of Authority at their Feet, fixed all appeals at their Tribunals, and
levelled the lofty Walls of his own stately House, for fear they should mistake
it for a Castle. Thus also did Menenius Agrippa, Camillus, and other eminent
Men in that popular State: so that by these means they made themselves the
Darlings of the people, whilst many others of a more Grandee-humor, soon lost
their Interest and Reputation.

Thus you see, that when a Peoples Right is once declared to them, it is almost
impossible to keep it, or take it from them.

It is pity, that the people of England, being born as free as any people in
the World, should be of such a supple humor and inclination, to bow under the
ignoble pressures of an Arbitrary Tyranny, and so unapt to learn what true
Freedom is. It is an inestimable Jewel, of more worth than your Estates, or
your Lives: it consists not in a License to do what you list, but in these few
particulars: First, in having who esome Laws sured to every Man's state and
condition. Secondly, in a due and easy course of administration, as to Law and
Justice, that the Remedies of Evil may be cheap and speedy. Thirdly, in a power
of altering Government and Governors upon occasion: Fourthly, in an
uninterrupted course of successive Parliaments, or Assemblies of the People.
Fifthly, in a free Election of Members to sit in every Parliament, when Rules
of Election are once established. By enjoying these only, a people are said to
enjoy their Rights, and to be truly stated in a condition of safety and
Freedom.

Now if Liberty is the most precious Jewel under the Sun, then when it is once
in possession, it requires more than an ordinary art and industry to preserve
it. But the great question is, Which is the safest way? whether by committing
of it into the hands of a standing Power, or by placing the Guardianship in the
hands of the People, in a constant succession of their supreme Assemblys. The
best way to determine this, is by observation out of Roman Stories; whereby it
plainly appears, that people never had any real Liberty, till they were
possessed of the power of calling and dissolving the Supreme Assemblies,
changing Governments, enacting and repealing Laws, together with a power of
choosing and depuring whom they pleased to this work, as often as they should
judge expedient, for their own well-being, and the good of the Public. This
power is said to be the first born of that Peoples Freedom: and many a shrewd
fit, many a pang and throw the Commonwealth had, before it could be brought
forth in the world: which ( Gracchus told them) was a sore affliction from the
gods, that they should suffer so much for the ignorance or negligence of their
Ancestors, who when they drove our Kings, forgot to drive out the Mysteries and
inconveniences of Kingly power, which were all reserved within the hands of the
Senate. By this means the poor people missing the first opportunity of settling
their freedom, soon lost it again: they were told they were a Free State; and
why? because (forsooth) they had no King, they had at length nev^r a Tarquin to
trouble them: but what was that to the purpose, as long as they had a Caius,
and an Appius Claudius, and the rest of that gant, who infected the Senators
with an humor of Kinging it from generation to generation? Alas, when the
Romans were at this pass, they were just such another Free State as was that of
Sparta, in the days of yore, where they had a Senate too, to pull down the
pride of Kings; but the people were left destitute of power and means to pull
down the pride of the Senate; by which means indeed they became free to do what
they list, whilst the people were confined within straite^ bounds than ever.
Such another Free State in these days is that of Venice, where the people are
free from the Dominion of their Prince or Duke; but little better than slaves
under the power of their Senate: but now in the Commonwealth of Athens the
case was far otherwise; where it was the care of Solon, that famous Lawgiver,
to place both the exercise and interest of Supremacy in the hands of the
people, so that nothing of a public interest could be imposed, but what passed
current by virtue of their consent and Authority: he instituted that famous
Council called the Areopagus, for the managing of State-transactions: but left
the power of Legislation, or lawmaking, in a successive course of the peoples
Assemblies; so that avoiding Kingly Tyranny on the one side, and Senatical
encroachments on the other, he is celebrated by all Posterity, as the man that
has left the only Pattern of a Free State fit for all the world to follow.

It is also to be observed, when Kings were driven out of Rome, though they
were declared and called a Free State, et it was a long time ere they could be
free indeed, in regard Brutus cheated them with a mere shadow and pretense of
liberty: he had indeed an Ambition high enough, and opportunity fairenough to
have seized the Crown into his own hands; but there were many considerations
that deterred him from it; for he well perceived how odious the name of King
was grown: Besides, had he sought to Inthrone himself, men would have judged it
was not love to his Country made him take up Arms, but desire of Dominion; nor
could he forget, that serene privacy is to be preferred before Hazardous
Royalty: For what hope could he have to keep the Seat long, who by his own
example had taught the people both the Theory and practice of opposing Tyranny?
It was necessary therefore that he should think of some other course more
plausible, whereby to work his own ends, and yet preserve the love of the
people; who not having been used to liberty, did very little understand it, and
therefore were the more easily gul'd out of the substance, and made content
with the shadow.

For the carrying on this Design, all the projecting Grandees joined pates
together; wherein, as one observes, Regnum quidem nomen, sed non Regia potestas
Roma fuit expulsa: Though the Name of King were exploded with alacrity, yet the
Kingly power was retained with all Art and subtilty, and shared under another
notion among themselves, who were the great ones of the City. For all Authority
was confined within the walls of a standing Senate, out of which, two Consuls
were chosen yearly; and so by turns they dubbed one another with a new kind of
Regality: the people being no gainers at all by this alteration of Government,
save only, that (like Asses) they were sadled with new Paniers of Slavery.

But what followed? The Senate having got all power into their own hands, in a
short time degenerated from their first Virtue and Institution, to the practice
of Avarice, Riot, and Luxury; whereby the love of their Country was changed
into a Study of Ambition and Faction: so that they fell into divisions among
themselves, as well as oppressions over the people; by which divisions, some
leading Grandees, more potent than their Fellows, took occasion to wipe their
Noses, and to assume the Power into their own hands, to the number of ten
persons. This Form of Government was known by the Name of the Decemvirate;
wherein these new Usurpers, joining Forces together, made themselves rich with
the spoils of the people, not caring by what unlawful means they purchased
either Profit or Pleasure, till that growing every day more insupportable, they
were in the end by force cashiered of their Tyranny.

that themselves, on whose shoulders the frame of State was supported, (and for
whose sakes all States are founded) should be so much vassalized at the will of
others, that they who were Lords abroad, should be Slaves at home: so that they
resolved to be ridden no longer under fair shows of Liberty. They raised a
Tumult under the conduct of their Tribune Canu^eius; nor could they by any
persuasion be induced to lay down Arms, till they were put in possession of
their Rights and Privileges. They were made capable of Offices of the
Government, even to the Dictatorship; had Officers of their own, called
Tribunes, who were held sacred and inviolable, as Protectors of the Commons,
and retained a power of meeting and acting with all Freedom in their great
Assemblies. a Ladder to climb unto Honors, as Nobility of Birth; and a Good
Man as much respected as a Great; which was a rare felicity of the Times, not
to be expected again, but upon the dawning of another golden Age.

The main Observation then arising out of this Discourse, is this: That not
only the Name of King, but the Thing King (whether in the hands of one or of
many) was plucked up root and branch, before ever the Romans could attain to a
full Establishment in their Rights and Freedoms.

Rome was thus declared A Free State, the next work was to establish their
Freedom in some sure and certain way: and in order to this, the first business
they pitched upon, was, not only to engage the people by an Oath against the
return of Tarquin's Family to the Kingdom, but also against the admission of
any such Officer as a King, for ever, because those brave men, who glorified
themselves in laying the foundation of a Commonwealth, well knew, that in a
short Revolution, others of a less public Spirit would arise in their places,
and gape again after a Kingdom. And therefore it was the special care of those
worthy Patriots, to imprint such Principles in men's minds, as might actuate
them with an irreconcilable enmity to the former Power: insomuch, that the very
Name of King became odious to the Roman People; yea, and they were so zealous
herein, that in process of time, when Caesar took occasion by Civil Discords to
assume the Sovereignty into his single Hands, he durst not entertain it under
the fatal Name of King, but clothed himself with the more plausible style of
Emperor; which nevertheless could not secure him from the fatal stab that was
given him by Brutus in revenge, on the behalf of the people. Our Neighbors of
Holland traced this example at the heels, when upon recovery of their Freedom
from Spain, they bind themselves by Oaths in those days were not like an old
Almanac.
an Oath to abjure the Government, not only of King Philip, but of all Kings
for ever.

Kings being cashiered out of Rome, then the Right of Liberty, together with
the Government, was retained within the hands and bounds of the Patrician or
Senatorian Order of Nobility; the people not being admitted into any share,
till partly by Mutinies, and partly by Importunities, they compelled the Senate
to grant them an Interest in Offices of State, and in the Legislative Power,
which were circumscribed before within the bounds of the Senate. Hence arose
those Officers called Tribunes, and those Conventions called Assemblies of the
People, which were as Bridles to restrain the Power and Ambition of the Senate,
or Nobility. came to be settled in an equal mixture of both Interests, Patrician
and Popular; under which Form, they attained to the height of all their Glory
and Greatness. In this Form of Free State, we now see the Venetian, where the
Patrician is predominant, and the People a little too much kept under. The same
Form is embraced also by our Neighbors the United Provinces; but the best part
of their Interest lies deposited in the hands of the people. Rome kept up their
Senate as their standing Council, for the managing of State Affairs, which
require Wisdom and Experience: but as for making of Laws, and the main Acts of
Supremacy, they were reserved to the Grand Assemblies; so that the People gave
Rules whereby to govern, and the secrets of Government were entrusted in the
hands of the Senate. And this Commonwealth ever thrived best, when the People
had most Power, and used most Moderation: and though they made use of it now
and then to fly out into extravagant courses, yet they were no lasting fits,
like those distempers that brake out through the Ambition of the Senators.
Besides, we cannot but take notice, as long as the Popular Interest continued
regular, and more predominant than the other, so long the People were secure of
their Liberties: which enjoyment, was a good Allay and Recompense, for many
harsh inconveniences that brake out when they were unruly and irregular: Rome
lost her Liberty; the Senate domineering over the People, and particular
Factions over the Senate, till those Factions tearing one another to pieces, at
length he that was head of the paramount surviving Faction, by name Caesar,
took occasion to usurp over all, swallowing up the Rights and Liherties of the
Romans, in the Gulf of a single Tyranny.

It was a Noble saying, (though Machiavel's). Not he that placeth-a virtuous
Government in his own hands, or family; but he that establishes a free and
la^ting Form, for the Peoples constant security, is most to be commended.
Whosoever has this opportunity, may improve his actions to a greater height of
glory, than ever followed the fame of any ambitious Idol that has gras^'d a
Monarchy: for, as ((...) says in Plutarch, Even the greatest Kings, or
Tyrants, refar inferior to those that are emi^ent in Free-States and
Commonwealths: N^r were those mighty Monarchs of old, to be compared with
Epimano^das, Pericles, Themistocles, Marcus Carius, Amilc^r, Fahius, and
Scipio, and other excellent Captains in Free-States, which purchas^d themselves
a fame, in defense of their Liberties. And though the very name of Liberty was
for a time grown odious, or ridiculous among us, having been long a stranger in
these and other parts; yet in Ancient time, Nations were wont to reckon
themselves so much the more Noble, as they were free from the Regal yoke: which
was the cause why then there were so many Free-States in all parts of the world.

Freedom; but experience assures it to be the most commodious and profitable
way of Government, conducing every way to the enlarging a people in Wealth and
Dominion. It is incredible to be spoken, (says Salust) how exceedingly the
Roman Commonwealth increased in a short time, after they had obtained Liberty.
And G^icciard^ne affirms, That* Free-States must needs be more pleasing to God
than any other Form, because in them more regard is to be had to the common
good, more care for the impartial distribution of Justice, and the minds of
men are more enflamed thereby to the love of Glory and Virtue, and become much
more zealous in the love of Religion, than in any other Government whatsoever.

It is wonderful to consider, how mightily the Athenians were augmented in a
few ye^rs, both in Wealth and Power, after they had freed themselves from the
Tyranny of Pistratus: but the Romans arrived to such a height, as was beyond
all imagination after the expulsion of their Kings, and Kingly Go ernment. Nor
do these things happen without special reason; it being usual in Free-States to
be more tender of the Public in all their Decrees, than of particular
Interests: whereas the case is otherwise in a Monarchy, because in this Form
the Princes pleasure weighs down all Considerations of the Common good. And
hence it is, that a Nation has no sooner lost its Liberty, and stooped under
the yoke of a single Tyrant, but it immediately loses its former luster, the
Body fills with ill humors, and may swell in Titles; but cannot thrive either
in Power or Riches, according to that proportion which it formerly enjoyed,
because all new Acquisitions are appropriated as the Princes peculiar, and in
no wise conduce to the ease and benefit of the Public.

It was the pride of Richard Nevil the great Earl of Warwick, and he reckoned
it the greatest of earthly glories, to be called, (as indeed he was) a
Kingmaker, in that he made and unmade Kings at his pleasure: for we read in our
Chronicles, how that he first pulled down the House of Lancaster, and brought
King Henry the sixth from a Crown to a Prison; setting up the Title of the
House of York, in the person of King Edward the fourth: afterward, he deposed
this Edward, drove him out of England, and restored the same Henry to the
Crown, whom he had before depressed. But the great Query is, Wherefore, and how
this was done? One would have thought, there had been no hope of reconciliation
betwixt him and the House of Lancaster, having so highly disobliged them, in
casting down and imprisoming the person of Henry. But yet it is very observable
of this man, Warwick, being on a sudden discontented with the change that he
had made, because he missed of those ends which he aimed at, in bringing it
about; and perceived other persons (whom he conceived his inferiors, to
partake of the interest and favor of Edward; therefore, out of an emulous
impatience of Spirit, he presently cast about to undo all that before he had
done; he suppressed the new Government, to advance the old.

From which piece of Story, we may very well conclude, how unsafe it is in a
new alteration, to trust any man with too great a share of Government, or place
of Trust; for such persons stand ever ready (like that Warwick) upon any
occasion of discontent, or of serving their own Interests, to betray and alter
the Government; especially if they have Warwick's main Guard, that is, if they
can (as he did) bring the Prince whom they formerly disobliged, to come in upon
their own terms, and upon such conditions as may bridle him, and secure the
Power so in their own Hands, that whilst he King it only in Title, themselves
may be Kings de facto, and leave their old Friends in the lurc^, or yield them
up at M^rcy, (as Warwick did) to gratify the Tyrant, and their own Tyrannical
ambition.

How much therefore does it concern every Commonwealth, in such a case, to see
and beware, that Warwick's Ghost be not conjured up again, to act a Part in
some new Tragedy!

The Right Constitution of a Commonwealth.
THe Romans having justly and nobly freed themselves from the Tyranny of Kings,
and being in time brought to understand that the interest of Freedom consists
in a due and orderly Succession of the Supreme Assemblies* they then made it
their care, by all good ways and means, to fortify the Commonwealth, and
establish it in a free enjoyment of that Interest, as the only bar to the
return of Kings, and their main security against the subtle mining of Kingly
humors and usurpations. The pu^^ike Rostra, or Pulpits, sounded out the
commendations of Freedom; their Augurs, or Prophets, found Freedom written in
the entrails of Beasts, and collected it from the flight of the auspicious
bird, the Sun-daring Eagle, spreading her wings aloft over the Capitol: the
common people also, in their common discourses, breathed nothing but Freedom;
and used the frequent mention of it, as a Charm against the return of Tyranny.

Nor was it without reason, that this brave and active people were so
studiously devoted to the preservation of their Freedom, when they had once
attained it, considering how easy and excellent it is above all other Forms of
Government, if it be kept within due bounds and order. That the People (that
is, such as shall be successively chosen to represent the People) are the best
Keepers of their own Liberties; and that for these following Reasons.

in the world have felt to some purpose: for they naturally move within the
circle of domination, as in their proper Center; and count it no less Security
than Wisdom and Policy, to brave it over the People. Thus Suetonius tells us,
how Caesar, Crassus, and another, Societatem iniere, requid ageretur in Repub.
quod displicuisset ulli e tribus: Made a bargain between themselves, that
nothing should be done in the Commonwealth that displeased either of them
three. Such another Triumvirate of Grandees was that of Augustus, Lepidus, and
Antonie, who agreed to share the world between themselves; and traced the same
paths as the other did, to the top of worldly Tyranny, over the ruins of their
Countries Liberties: they saved and destroyed, depressed and advanced whom they
pleased, with a wet Finger. But whilst the Government remained untouched in the
peoples Hands, every particular man lived safe, (except the Ambitious) and no
man could be undone, unless a true and satisfactory reason were rendered to the
world for his destruction.

Cincinnatus was fetched out of the Field from his Plow, and placed (much
against his will) in the sublime Dignity of Dictator: so the noble Camillus,
and Fabius, and Curious, were, with much ado, drawn from the recreation of
Gardening, to the trouble of Governing: and the Consul-yeer being over, they
returned with much gladness again to their private employment.

Maelius, Menlius, and others; sometimes in danger of a surprise by a Grandee
Cabinet or Junta, who by contracting a particular Interest, distin^t from that
which they had in common with the people, so ordered the matter in time, that
partly by their own strength, and partly by advantage of Power, to gratify and
curb whom they pleased, and to wind in other Councils and parties to their own,
they still brought the lesser into such subjection, that in the end they were
forced all either to yield to the pleasure of the Grandees, or be broken by
them. By these practices, they oroduced that upstart Tyranny of the Decemviri,
when ten men made a shift to enslave the Senate, as well as the people. Lastly,
by continuing power too long in the hands of particular persons, they were
swallowed up by two Triumvirates of Emperors by turns, who never left pecking
at one another, till Julius and Augustus, having beaten all Competitors out of
the Field, subjected all to the will of a single Emperor. If this were so
among the Romans, how happy then is any Nation, and how much ought they to joy
in the Wisdom and Justice of their Trustees, where certain Limits and Bounds
are fixed to the Powers in being, by a declared succession of the supreme
Authoty in the hands of the People!

to wit, Faction: for, as Faction is an adhering to, and a promoting of an
Interest, that is distinct from the true and declared Interest of State: so it
is a matter of necessity, that those that drive it on, must have time to
improve their slights and projects, in disguising their designs, drawing in
Instruments and Parties, and in worming out of their opposires. The effecting
of all this, requires some length of time: therefore the only prevention is a
due succession and revolution of Authority in the Hands of the People.

That this is most true, appears not only by Reason, but by Example: if we
observe the several turns of Faction in the Roman Government. What made their
Kings so bold, as to incroach and tyrannize over the People, but the very same
course that heightened our Kings heretofore in England, to wit, a continuation
of Power in their own Persons and Families? Then, after the Romans became a
Commonwealth, was it not for the same Reason, that the Senate fell into such
heats and fits among themselves? Did not Appius Claudius and his Junta, by the
same means, Lord it over the Senate? Whence was it, that Sylla and Marius
caused so many proscriptions, cruelties, and combustions in Rome, but by an
extraordinary continuation of Power in themselves? How came it to pass
likewise, that Julius Caesar aspired, and in the end artained the Empire? and,
that the People of Rome quite lost their Liberty, was it not by the same means?
For, had not the Sena^e and People so long protracted the Power of Pompey and
Caesar; had Pompey had less command in Asia, and Caesar less in Gallia, Rome
might have stood much longer in the possession of her Liberty.

After the death of Caesar, it was probable enough, they ^ight then have
recovered their Liberty, but that they ran again into the same Error, as
before: for by a continuation of Power in the hands of Octavius, Lepidus, and
Antonie, the Commonwealth came to be rent and divided into three several
Factions; two of which being worn out by each other, only Octavius remained;
who considering, that the Title of perpetual Dictator was the ruin of his
Father Julius, continued the Government only for a set-time, and procured it
to be settled upon himself but for ten years. But what was the effect of this
continuation of Power? Even this, That as the former protractings had been the
occasions of Faction, so this produced a Tyranny: for, at the end of every ten
years, he wanted no pretense to renew a lease of the Government; and by this
means so played his Cards, that at length he easily and utterly extinguished
the small remains of the Roman Freedom.

The Observation then arising from hence, is this, that the only way for a
people to preserve themselves in the enjoyment of their Freedom, and to avoid
those fatal inconveniences of Faction and Tyranny, is, to maintain a due and
orderly succession of Power and Persons. This was, and is, good Commonwealths
Language; and without this Rule, it is impossible any Nation should long
subsist in a State of Freedom. So that the Wisdom, the Piety, the Justice, and
the self-denial of those Governors in Free-States, is worthy of all honor and
admiration, who have, or shall at any time as willingly resign their Trusts, as
ever they took them up; and have so far denied themselves, as to prefix Limits
and Bounds to their own Authority. This was it that made Brutus so famous in
the beginning of the Roman Commonwealth. For this also it was, that History
has left so reverend a remembrance of Scipio, Camillus, and Virginus; as did
Cato likewise of Pompey: whilst the ten Grandee Usurpers, with Sylla, and
Caesar, and the Names of others that practiced the contrary, are left as odious
upon the Roman Record, as the Name of Richard the third, will be in our modern
Chronicle, to all Posterity.

of a Faction: both these designs must lie long in fermentation, or else they
can never gain the beloved opportunity to bring matters to perfection. The
Truth of this appears likewise in the Story of the Roman State: for, as long
as all Authority was confined within the Walls of a standing Senate, they being
more studious of their own, than the common good, in a short time the
Commonwealth was turned altogether into a private; insomuch, that the people
became not only incapable of any Honor and Authority; but well-nigh reduced
to flat beggary. Hence it was, that so many Quarrels and Combustions arose one
after another: for, the Great Ones having made use of their time, in drawing
all to themselves, the People were forced to live upon borrowing; and when they
could borrow no longer, they fell into a general Mutiny, and forsook the City:
nor could they be pacified till all Accounts were quitted; and then, with much
ado, they were wrought upon with the Eloquence of Menenius Agrippa, with his
excellent Fable of a Mutiny in a natural Body, among the Members against the
Belly.

Thus, as the first Insurrection was occasioned by the Usury and Exactions of
the Great Ones; who by their long continuance in Power, had drawn all unto
themselves: so the second was occasioned by the Lordliness of those ten
Persons, who being elected to do Justice, according to the Laws, made use of
their time, only to confirm their Power, and Greaten themselves, by
replenishing their own Coffers, engrossing of Offices, and preferring their own
Kindred and Alliances: and at length, improved Self-Interest so high, that they
domineered, like absolute Tyrants, advancing and depressing whom they pleased,
without respect of Merit or Insufficiency, Vice or Virtue; so that having
secured all in their own Hands, they overruled their Fellow-Senators at
pleasure, as well as the People.

Many more instances of Aftertimes might be given; but these are sufficient
whereupon to ground this Observation, That as the first Founders of the Roman
Liberty did well in driving out their Kings; so on the other side, they did
very ill in settling a standing Authority within themselves: for, by this means,
lying open to the Temptations of Honor and Profit, (which are Sails too big
for any humane bulk) they were immediately swallowed up of Self; and taking
their rise from the opportunity of a continued Power, made use of the Public
only to advance their Private, whereby they put the Commonwealth into frequent
flames of discontent and sedition; which might all have been prevented, could
they have denied themselves at first, and settled the State Free indeed, (as
they ought to have done) by placing an orderly succession of supreme Authority
in the Hands of the People.

Pressure and Oppression: so questionless the People, who are most sensible of
their own Burdens, being once put into a capacity and Freedom of Acting, are
the most likely to provide Remedies for their own Relief; they only know where
the shoe wrings, what Grievances are most heavy, and what future Fences they
stand in need of, to shelter them from the injurious Assaults of those Powers
that are above them: and therefore it is but Reason, they should see that none
be interested in the supreme Authority, but Persons of their own election, and
such as must in a short time return again into the same condition with
themselves, to reap the same Benefit or Burden, by the Laws enacted, that
befalls the rest of the People. Then the issue of such a Constitution must
needs be this, That no Load shall be laid upon any, but what is common to all,
and that always by common consent; not to serve the Lusts of any, but only to
supply the Necessities of their Country.

But when it happens, that a supreme Power long continues in the Hands of any
Person or Persons; they, by greatness of place, being seated above the middle
Region of the People, sit secure from all winds and weathers, and from those
storms of violence that nip and terrify the inferior part of the World:
whereas, if by a successive Revolution of Authority, they came to be degraded
of their Earthly Godheads, and return into the same condition with other
Mortals, they must needs be the more sensible and tender of what shall be laid
upon them. The strongest Obligation that can be laid upon any Man in public
Matters, is, To see that he engage in nothing, but what must either offensively
or beneficially reflect upon himself: for as, if any be never so good a
Patriot, yet if his power be prolonged, he will find it hard to keep Self from
creeping in upon him, and prompting him to some Extravagancies for his own
private Benefit; so, on the other side, if he be shortly to return to a
condition common with the rest of his Brethren, self-Interest binds him to do
nothing but what is Just and Equal; he himself being to reap the good or evil
of what is done, as well as the meanest of the people.

This without controversy must needs be the most Noble, the most Just, and the
most excellent way of Government in Free-States; without which, it is obvious
to common sense, no Nation, can long continue in a state of Freedom: as appears
likewise by Example out of the Roman Story. For what more noble Patriots were
there ever in the World, than the Roman Senators were, whilst they were kept
under by their Kings, and felt the same Burdens of their fury, as did the rest
of the people? but afterward being freed from the Kingly yoke, and having
secured all power within the hands of themselves and their posterity, they at
length fell into the same Absurdities that had been before committed by their
Kings; so that this new yoke became more intolerable than the former. Nor could
the people find any Remedy, until they procured that necessary Office of the
Tribunes; who being invested with a temporary Authority by the peoples
Election, remained the more sensible of their condition, and were as Moderators
between the Power of the Great Ones, and the Rights of the People.

What more excellent Patriot could there be than Manlius, till he became
corrupted by Time and Power? Who more Noble, and Courteous, and Wellaffected to
the common good, than was Appius Claudius at first? but afterward, having
obtained a Continuation of the Government in his own hands, he soon lost his
primitive Innocence and Integrity, and devoted himself to all the Practices of
an Absolute Tyrant. Many others might be reckoned up. And therefore, hence it
was, That when the Senate (for some Reasons) though to continue Lucius Quintius
in the Consulship longer than the usual time; that gallant Man utterly refused
it, and chose rather to deny himself, than that a Precedent so prejudicial to
the Roman Freedom should be made for his sake, by a Prerogative of Authority
in his hands, beyond the ordinary Custom.

best keepers of their own Liberties, is, Because, as in other Forms, those
persons only have access to Government, who are apt to serve the lust and will
of the Prince, or else are parties or compliers with some powerful Faction: so
in this Form of Government by the People, the door of Dignity stands open to
all (without exception) that ascend thither by the steps of Worth and Virtue:
the consideration whereof has this noble effect in Free-States, That it edges
men's spirits with an active emulation, and raises them to a lofty pitch of
design and action.

The truth of this is very observable in the Roman State: for, during the
Vassalage of that People under Kings, we read not of any notable Exploits, but
find them confined within a narrow compass, oppressed at home, and ever and
anon ready to be swallowed up by their enemies. After this Government of Kings
was abolished, you know that of Grandees in a standing Senate was next erected;
under which Form, they made shift to enlarge their bounds a little: but the
most they could then do, was only to secure themselves from the attempts of the
banished Tarquins, and those petty neighbors that envied the small increase of
their Dominion. But at length, when the State was made free indeed, and the
People admitted into a share and interest in the Government, as well as the
Great Ones; then it was, and never till then, that their thoughts and power
began to exceed the bounds of Italy, and aspire toward that prodigious Empire.
For, while the road of Preferment lay plain to every man, no public work was
done, nor any Conquest made; but every man thought he did and conquered all for
himself, as long as he remained valiant and virtuous: it was not Alliance, nor
Friendship, nor Faction, nor Riches, that could advance men; but Knowledge,
Valor, and virtuous Poverty, was preferred above them all.

For the confirmation whereof, we find in the same Story, how that many of
their brave Patriots and Conquerors were men of the meanest Fortune, and of so
rare a temper of spirit, that they little cared to improve them, or enrich
themselves by their public employment: so that when they died, they were fain
to be buried at the public charge. We find Cincinnatus, a man of mean
fortune, fetched from the Plough, to the dignity of a Dictator: for he had no
more than four acres of land, which he tilled with his own hands. Yet so it
happened, that when the Roman Conful with his whole Army was in great peril,
being circumvented and straightened by the Equuns, and the City of Rome it self in
a trembling condition; then, with one consent, they pitched upon Cincinnatus,
as the fittest man for their deliverance: and he behaved himself so well, with
so much magnanimity, integrity, and wisdom, that he relieved the Consul, routed
and utterly subdued the Enemy, and gave as it were a new life to his Countries
Liberties: which work being over, he with all willingness quitted his
Authority, and returned to the condition of a painful private life.

This Example might seem strange, but that we know it was ordinary in that
State, till it grew corrupt again: for, we read also, how Lucius Tarquin, (not
of the Tyrants family) a man of mean fortune, yet of great worth, was chosen
General of the Horse, and drawn to it out of the Country, in which place he
surpassed all the Roman youth for gallant behavior. Such another plain
Country-fellow was Attilius Regulus, the scourge of Carthage in his time; of
whom many eminent points of Bravery were recorded: as were also most of those
Heroic spirits that succeeded, down to the times of Lucius Paulus Emilius, by
whose Conquests, the first charms and enchantments of Luxury were brought out
of Asia to Rome, and there they soon swallowed up the remainders of primitive
integrity and simplicity. And yet it is very observable also, that so much of
the ancient severity was remaining still even in the time of this Paulus, the
famous General, that a Silver dish, that was part of the Spoil, being given to
a son-in-law of his, who had fought stoutly in that war, it was thought a great
reward; and observed by the Historian, to be the first piece of plate that ever
was seen in the Family.

This Observation then arises from this Discourse, That as Rome never thrived
till it was settled in a Freedom of the People; so that Freedom was preserved,
and that Interest best advanced, when all Places of Honor and Trust were
exposed to men of Merit, without distinction; which happiness could never be
obtained, until the people were instated in a capacity of preferring whom they
thought worthy, by a Freedom of electing men successively into their Supreme
Offices and Assemblies. So long as this Custom continued, and Merit took
place, the people made shift to keep and increase their Liberties: but when it
lay neglected, and the stream of Preferment began to run along with the favor
and pleasure of particular powerful men, then Vice and Compliance making way
for Advancement, the people could keep their Liberties no longer; but both
their Liberties and themselves were made the price of every man's Ambition and
Luxury.

of their Liberty, is, because it is they only that are concerned in the point
of Liberty: for, whereas in other Forms the main Interest and Concernment both
of Kings and Grandees, lies either in keeping the People in utter ignorance
what Liberty is, or else in allowing and pleasing them only with the name and
shadow of Liberty in stead of the substance: so in Free-States the People being
sensible of their past condition in former times, under the Power of Great
Ones, and comparing it with the possibilities and enjoyments of the present,
become immediately instructed, that their main Interest and Concernment
consists in Liberty; and are taught by common sense, that the only way to
secure it from the reach of Great Ones, is, to place it in the Peoples Hands,
^adorned with all the Prerogatives and Rights of Supremacy. The Truth of it is,
the Interest of Freedom is a Virgin that every one seeks to deflower; and like
a Virgin, it must be kept from any other Form, or else (so great is the Lust of
mankind after dominion) there follows a rape upon the first opportunity. This
being considered, it-will easily be granted, That Liberty must needs lie more
secure in the Peoples than in any others hands, because they are most concerned
in it: and the careful eyeing of this Concernment, is that which makes them
both jealous and zealous; so that nothing will satisfy, but the keeping of a
constant Guard against the Attempts and Inchroachments of any powerful or
crafty Underminers.

Hence it is, that the People having once tasted the Sweets of Freedom, are so
extremely affected with it, that if they discover, or do but suspect the least
Design to incroach upon it, they count it a Crime never to be forgiven for any
consideration whatsoever. Thus it was in the Roman State, where one gave up
his Children, another his Brother to death, to revenge an Attempt against
common Liberty: diverse also sacrificed their Lives, to preserve it; and some
their best Friends, to vindicate it, upon bare suspicion; as in the Cases of
Maelius, and Manlius, and others, after manifest violation as in the Case of
Caesar.

Nor was it thus only in Rome; but we find also as notable instances of
revenge in the Free-People of Greece, upon the same occasion. But the most
notable of all, is that which happened in the Island of Corcyra, during the war
of Peloponnesus: where the People having been rook'd of Liberty by the slights
and power of the Grandees, and afterward by the assistance of the Free-states
of Athens recovering it again, took occasion thereupon to clap up all the
Grandees, and chopped off ten of their Heads at one time, in part of
satisfaction for the Injury: but yet this would not serve the turn; for, some
delay being made in executing of the rest, the People grew so enraged, that
they ran, and pulled down the very Walls, and buried them in the ruins and
rubbish of the Prison.

We see it also in the Free State of Florence, where Cosmus the first Founder
of the Tuscan-Tyranny, having made shipwreck of their Liberty, and seized all
into his own Hands; though he enslaved their Bodies, yet he could not subdue
their Hearts, nor wear their past Liberty our of Memory; for upon the first
opportunity, they sought revenge, and a recovery; forcing him to fly for the
safety of his Life: and though afterward he made way for his Return and
Re-establishment by Treachery, yet now after so long a time, the old Freedom is
fresh in memory, and would show it self again upon a favorable occasion.

But of all Modern Instances, the most strange is that of the Land of Holstein;
which being deprived of Liberty, and about seventy years since made a Duchy,
and an Appendix to the Crown of Denmark; though the Inhabitants be but a
Boorish, poor, silly Generation, yet still they retain a sense of Indignation
at the loss of their Liberty; and being given to drink, the usual Complement in
the midst of their Cups, is this, Here is a health to the remembrance of our
Liberty.

Thus you see what an impression the love of Freedom makes in the minds of the
people: so that it will be easily concluded, They must be the best Keepers of
their own Liberties; being more tender and more concerned in their security,
than any powerful pretenders whatsoever.



The evidence of this may be made out, not only by Reason, but by Examples old
and new. And first, by Reason, it is evident, That the People must needs be
less luxurious than Kings or the Great Ones, because they are bounded within a
more lowly pitch of Desire and Imagination: give them but panem and tircenses;
Bread, Sport and Ease, and they are abundantly satisfied. Besides, the People
have less means and opportunities for Luxury, than those pompous standing
powers, whether in the hands of one or many: so that were they never so much
inclined to Vice or Vanity, yet they are not able to run on to the same measure
of Excess and Riot. Secondly, as it appears they are less Luxurious; so, for
this Cause also, it is clear, They (that is, their successive Representatives)
must be the best Governors; not only, because the current of succession keeps
them the less corrupt and presumptious; but also, because, being the more free
from luxurious Courses, they are likewise free from those oppressive and
injurious Practices, which Kings and Grandees are most commonly led and forced
unto, to hold up the port and splendour of their Tyranny and to satisfy those
natural appetites of Covetousness, Pride, Ambition and Ostentation, which are
the perpetual Attendants of Great Ones, and Luxury. Thus much for Reason.

Now, for Example, we might produce a Cloud of Instances, to show* That
Free-States, or the People duly qualified with the Supreme Authority, are less
devoted to Luxury, than the Grandee or Kingly Powers: but we shall give you
only a few,

The first that comes in our way is the State of Athens, which, whilst it
remained free in the Peoples Hands, was adorned with such Governors as gave
themselves up to a serious, abstemious, severe course of Life; so that whilst
Temperance and Liberty walked hand in hand, they improved the points of Valor
and Prudence so high, that in a short time they became the only Arbitrators of
all Affairs in Greece. But being at the height, then (after the common fate of
all worldly Powers) they began to decline; for, (contrary to the Rules of a
Free State) permitting some men to greaten themselves, by continuing long in
Power and Authority, they soon lost their pure Principles of Severity and
Liberty: for, upstarted those thirty Grandees, (commonly called the Tyrants)
who having usurped a standing Authority unto themselves, presently quitted the
old Discipline and Freedom, gave up themselves first to Charms of Luxury, and
afterward to all the practices of an absolute Tyranny. Such also was the
condition of that State, when at another time (as in the days of Pistratus) it
was usurped in the hands of a single Tyrant.

From Athens let us pass to Rome, where we find it in the days of Tarquin,
dissolved into Debauchery. Upon the change of Government, their manners were
somewhat mended, as were the Governors in the Senate: but that being a
standing Power, soon grew corrupt; and first let in Luxury, then Tyranny, till
the people being interested in the Government, established a good Discipline
and Freedom both together; which was upheld with all Severity, till the ten
Grandees came in play after; whose Deposition, Liberty, and Sobriety began to
breath again, till the days of Sylla, Marius, and other Grandees that followed
down to Caesar, in whose time Luxury and Tyranny grew to such a height, that
unless it were in the Life and Conversation of Cato, there was not so much as
one spark, that could be raked out of the ashes, of the old Roman Discipline
and Freedom; so that of all the World, only Cato remained as a Monument of
that Temperance, Virtue and Freedom, which flourished under the Government of
the People.

Omitting many other Examples, our Conclusion upon these Particulars shall be
this, That since the Grandee or Kingly Powers, are ever more luxurious, than
the popular are, or can be: and since Luxury ever brings on Tyranny, as the
only bane of Liberty; certainly the Rights and Privileges of the People,
placed and provided for, in a due and orderly succession of their Supreme
Assemblies, must needs remain more secure in their own Hands, than in any
others whatsoever.

This it is which makes men aspire unto great Actions, when the Reward depends
not upon the Will and Pleasure of particular Persons, as it does under all
standing Powers; but is conferred upon Men (without any consideration of Birth
or Fortune) according to merit, as it ever is, and ought to be in Free-States,
that are rightly constituted.

The Truth of this will appear much more evident, if ye list a little to take a
view of the condition of People, under various Forms of Government: for, the
Romans of old, while under Kings, (as you heard before) remained a very
inconsiderable People, either in Dominion or Reputation; and could never
enlarge their Command very far beyond the Walls of their City. Afterward,
being reduced unto that standing power of the Senate, they began to thrive a
little better, and, for a little time: yet all they could do, was only to
struggle that for a subsistence among bad Neighbors. But at length, when the
People began to know, claim, and possess their Liberties in being governed by a
sucession of their Supreme Officers and Assemblies; then it was, and never till
then, that they laid the Foundation, and built the Structure of that wondrous
Empire that overshadowed the whole World. And truly the founding of it must
needs be more wonderful, and a great Argument of an extraordinary Courage and
Magnanimity, wherewith the People was endued in Recovery of Liberty; because
their first Conquests were laid in the ruin of mighty Nations, and such as
were every jot as free as themselves: which made the difficulties-so much the
more, by how much the more free (and consequently, the more courageous) they
were, against whom they made opposition: for as in those days the World
abounded with Free-States, more than any other Form, as all over Italy, Gallia,
Spain, and Africa, etc. so specially in Italy, where the Tuscans, the Samnites,
and other Emulators and Competitors of the Roman Freedom, approved themselves
magnanimous Defenders of their Liberty against Rome, that they endured Wars so
many years with utmost extremity, before ever they could brought to bow under
the Roman Yoke. This magnanimous State of Freedom, was the cause also why
Charthage was enabled so long, not only to oppose, but often to hazard the
Roman Fortune, and usurp the Laurel. It brought Hannibal within view, and the
Gauls within the Walls of the City, to a besieging of the Capitol; to show,
that their Freedom had given them the courage to rob her of her Maidenhead,
who afterward became Mistress of the whole World. But what serves all this
for, but only to show, That as nothing but a State of Freedom could have
enabled those Nations with a Courage sufficient so long to withstand the Roman
Power: so Rome her self also was beholden to this State of Freedom, for those
Sons of Courage which brought the Necks of her Sister-States and Nations under
her Girdle? And it is observable also in aftertimes, when Tyranny took place
against Liberty, the Romans soon lost their ancient Courage and Magnanimity;
first under usurping Dictators, then under Emperors, and in the end, the Empire
it self.

Now, as on the one side, we feel a loss of Courage and Magnanimity, follow the
loss of Freedom: so, on the other side, the People ever grow magnanimous and
courageous upon a Recovery; witness at present, the valiant Swisses, the
Hollanders, and not long since, our own Nation, when declared a Free State, and
a Re-establishment of our Freedom in the hands of the People procured, (though
not secured) what noble Designs were undertaken and prosecuted with success?
The Consideration whereof, must needs make highly for the Honor of all
Governors in Free-States, who have been, or shall be instrumental in redeeming
and setting any People in a fullness of Freedom, that is, in a due and orderly
succession of their supreme Assemblies.

free from the Arbitrary Disposition of any commanding Power. In this Case, as
the People know what Laws they are to obey, and what Penalties they are to
undergo, in case of Transgression; so having their share and interest in the
making of Laws, with the Penalties annexed, they become the more inexcusable if
they offend, and the more willingly submit unto punishment when they suffer for
any offense. Now the case is usually far otherwise, under all standing Powers:
for, when Government is managed in the hands of a particular Person, or
continued in the hands of a certain number of Great Men, the People then have
no Laws but what Kings and Great Men please to give: Not do they know how to
walk by those Laws, or how to understand them, because the sense is oftentimes
left at uncertainty; and it is reckoned a great Mystery of State in those Forms
of Government, That no Laws shall be of any sense or sorce, but as the Great
Ones please to expound them: so as by this means, the People many times are
left as it were without Law, because they bear no other construction and
meaning, but what suits with particular men's Interests and Phant'sies; not with
Right Reason, or the Public Liberty.

For the proof of this under Kingly Government, we might run all the world
over; but our own Nation affords Instances enough in the Practices of all our
Kings: yet this Evil never came to such a height, as it did in the Reign of
Henry the seventh, who by usurping a Prerogative of expounding the Laws after
his own pleasure, made them rather Snares, than Instruments of Relief, (like a
grand Catch-pole) to pill, poll, and geld the Purses of the People; as his Son
Harry did after him, to deprive many Gallant Men both of their Lives and
Fortunes. For, the Judges being reputed the Oracles of the Law, and the power
of creating Judges being usurped by Kings, they had a care ever to create such,
as would make the Laws speak in Favor of them, upon any occasion. The Truth
whereof has abundantly appeared in the days of the late King, and his Father
James, whose usual Language was this: As long as I have power of making what
Judges and Bishops I please, I am sure to have no Law nor Gospel but what shall
please me.

This very providing for this Inconvenience, was the great Commendation of
Lycurgus his Institution in Sparta; who, though he cut out the Lacedemonian
Commonwealth after the Grandee fashion, confirming the Supremacy within the
Walls of the Senate, (for their King was but a Cipher) yet he so ordered the
matter, that he took away the Grandeur; that as their King was of little more
value than any one of the Senators; so the Senate was restrained by Laws,
walking in the same even pace of subjection with the People; having very few
Offices of Dignity or Profit allowed, which might make them swell with State
and Ambition; but were prescribed also the same Rules of Frugality, Plainness,
and Moderation, as were the Common People: by which means immoderate lusts and
desires being prevented in the Great Ones, they were the less inclined to Pride
and Oppression; and no great profit or pleasure being to be gotten by
Authority, very few desired it; and such as were in it, sat free from Envy,
by which means they avoided that odium and emulation which uses to rage betwixt
the Great Ones and the People in that Form of Government.

But now the case is far otherwise in the Commonwealth of Venice, where the
People being excluded from all interest in Government, the power of making and
executing of Laws, and bearing of Offices, with all other Immunities, lies
only in the hands of a standing Senate, and their Kindred, which they call the
Patrocian, or Noble Order. Their Duke, or Prince, is indeed restrained, and
made just such another Officer as were the Lacedemonian Kings; differing from
the rest of the Senate, only in a Corner of his Cap, besides a little outward
Ceremony and Splendour: but the Senators themselves have Liberty at random,
Arbitrarily to ramble, and do what they please with the people: who excepting
the City it self, are so extremely oppressed in all their Territories, living
by no Law, but the Arbitrary Dictates of the Senate, that it seems rather a
Junta, than a Commonwealth; and the Subjects take so little content in it, that
seeing more to be enjoyed under the Turk, they that are his Borderers take all
opportunities to revolt, and submit rather to the mercy of a Pagan-Tyranny.
Which disposition if you consider, together with the little Courage in their
Subjects, by reason they press them so hard; and how that they are forced, for
this cause, to rely upon Foreign Mercenaries in all warlike Expeditions, you
might wonder how this State has held up so long; but that we know the Interest
of Christendom, being concerned in her Security, she has been chiefly
supported by the Supplies and Arms of others.

Therefore our Conclusion shall be this, That since Kings, and all standing
Powers, are so inclinable to act according to their own Wills and in Interests,
in making, expounding, and executing of Laws to the prejudice of the Peoples
Liberty and Security: and seeing the only way to prevent Arbitrariness is,
That no Laws or Dominations whatsoever should be made, but by the Peoples
Consent and Election: therefore it must of necessity be granted, that the
People are the best Keepers of their own Liberties, being settled in a due and
orderly succession of their supreme Assemblies.

Cicero says, Man is a noble Creature, born with Affections to rule, rather
than obey; there being in every man a natural appetite or desire of
Principality. And therefore the Reason why one man is content to submit to the
Government of another, is, not because he conceives himself to have less right
than another to govern; but either because he finds himself less able, or else
because he judges it will be more convenient for himself, and that community
whereof he is a Member, if he submits unto another's Government. Nemini purere
vult animus a natura been informatus, nisi, etc. says the same Cicero: that is
to say, in honest English, A mind well instructed by the light of Nature, will
pay obedience unto none, but such as command, direct, or govern, for its good
and benefit. From both which passages and expressions of that Oracle of Humane
wisdom, these three inferences do naturally arise: First, that by the light of
Nature people are taught to be their own Carvers and Contrivers, in the framing
of that Government under which they mean to live. Secondly, that none are to
preside in Government, or sit at the Helm, but such as shall be judged fit, and
chosen by the People. Thirdly, that the People are the only proper Judges of
the convenience or inconvenience of a Government when it is erected, and of the
behavior of Governors after they are chosen: which three Deductions appear to
be no more, but an Explanation of this most excellent Maxim, That the Original
and Fountain of all just Power and Government is in the People.

This being so, that a Free-State-Government by the People, that is, by their
successive Representatives, or supreme Assemblies, duly chosen, is most
natural and only suitable to the Reason of mankind: then it follows, that the
other forms, whether it be of a standing Power in the Hands of a particular
person, as a King; or of a set number of Great Ones, as in a Senate, are
besides the Dictates of Nature, being mere artificial devices of Great Men,
squared out only to serve the Ends and Interests of Avarice, Pride and
Ambition of a few, to a vassalizing of the Community. The Truth whereof appears
so much the more, if we consider, That a Consent and free Election of the
People, which is the most natural Way and Form of governing, has no real
effect in the other Forms; but is either supplanted by Craft and Custom, or
swallowed up by a pernicious pretense of Right (in one or many) to govern,
only by virtue of an Hereditary succession. Now certainly, were there no other
Argument to prove the excellency of Government by the People, etc. beyond the
other Forms; yet this one might suffice, That in the Peoples Form, men have
Liberty to make use of that Reason and Understanding God has given them, in
choosing of Governors, and providing for their own safety in Government: but in
the other Forms of a standing Power, all Authority being entailed to certain
Persons and Families, in a course of inheritance, men are always deprived of
the use of their Reason about choice of Governors, and forced to receive them
blindely, and at all adventure: which course being so destructive to the
Reason, common Interest, and Majesty of that Noble Creature, called Man, that
he should not in a matter of so high consequence as Government, (wherein the
good and safety of all is concerned) have a Freedom of Choice and Judgment,
must needs be the most irrational and brutish Principle in the World, and fit
only to be hissed out of the World, together with all Forms of standing Power
(whether in Kings, or others) which have served for no other end, but transform
Men into Beasts, and mortified mankind with misery through all Generations.

The Truth of this is evident all the World over; first, by sad Examples of
Monarchy: for, the Kingly form having been retained in a course of Inheritance,
men being forced to take what comes next for a Governor, whether it be Male or
Female, a wise Man or a Fool, Good or Bad; so that the major part of Hereditary
Princes, have been Tyrannous and Wicked by Nature, or made so by Education and
Opportunity: the People have been for the most part banded to and fro, with
their Lives and Fortunes, at the Will and Pleasure of some one single unworthy
Fellow, who usually assumes the greater confidence in his unrighteous dealing,
because he knows the People are tied in that Form to him and his, though he
practice all the Injustice in the World. This was it that brought on Tyranny in
Rome, first under their Kings, afterward under Emperors: for it is to be
observed out of the Story, that all those Emperors which ruled by right of
Inheritance, proved most of them no better than savage Beasts, and all of them
Wicked except Titus. It Is true indeed, That a Nation may have some respite and
recruit now and then, by the Virtue and Valor of a single Prince; yet this is
very rare; and when it does happen, it usually lasts no longer than for his
Life, because his Son or Successor (for the most part) proves more weak or
vicious, than himself was Virtuous, as you may see in the several Lists of
Kings throughout Great Britain, France, Spain, and all the World. But this is
not all the Inconvenience, that Hereditary Princes have been and are for the
most part Wicked in their own Persons: for, as great Inconveniences happen by
their being litigious in their Titles; witness the bloody disputes between the
Princes of the Blood in France, as also in England, between the two Houses of
York and Lancaster; to which many more might be reckoned out of all other
Kingdoms; which miseries, the people might have avoided, had they not been tied
to one particular Line of Succession. Therefore if any Kingly Form be
tolerable, it must be that which is by Election, chosen by the Peoples
Representatives, and made an Officer of Trust by them, to whom they are to be
accountable. And herein, as Kings are only tolerable upon this account, as
Elective; so these Elective Kings are as intolerable upon another account,
because their present Greatness gives them opportunity ever to practice such
flights, that in a short time, the Government that they received only for
their own Lives, will become entailed upon their Families, whereby the Peoples
Election will be made of no effect further, than for Fashion, to mock the poor
People, and adorn the Triumphs of an aspiring Tyranny; as it has been seen in
the Elective Kingdoms of Bohemia, Poland, Hungaria, and Sweden; where the Forms
of Election were, and are still retained; but the Power swallowed up, and the
Kingdoms made Hereditary; not only in Sweden, by the Artifice of Gustavus
Ericus; but also in Poland, and the Empire, where the peoples right of election
was soon eaten out by the cunning of the two Families of Casimira and Austria.

Let this serve to manifest, that a Government by a free Election and Consent
of the People, settled in a due and orderly succession of their supreme
Assemblies, is more consonant to the light of Nature and Reason, and
consequently much more excellent than any Hereditary standing Power whatsoever.
To take off all mis-constructions; when we mention the People, observe all
along, that we do not mean the confused promiscuous Body of the People, nor any
part of the people who have forfeited their Rights by Delinquency, Neutrality,
or Apostasy, etc. in relation to the divided state of any Nation; for they are
not to be reckoned within the Lists of the People.

above the ordinary Standard, to assume unto themselves the State and Title of
Nobility.

The Observation of the former, setures the Peoples Liberty from the reach of
their own Officers, such as being entrusted with the Affairs of high Trust and
Employment, either in Camp and Council, might perhaps take occasion thereby to
aspire beyond Reason, if not restrained and prevented.

The Observation of the later, secures the People from the pressures and
Ambition of such perty Tyrants, as would usurp and claim a Prerogative, Power,
and Greatness above others, by Birth and Inheritance. These are a sort of Men
not to be endured in any well-ordered Commonwealth; for they always bear a
Natural and Implacable Hate toward the People, making it their Interest to
deprive them of their Liberty; so that if at any time it happen, that any great
Man or Men whatsoever, arrive to so much Power and Confidence, as to think of
usurping, or to be in a Condition to be tempted thereunto; these are the first
that will set them on, mingle Interests with them, and become the prime
Instruments in heaving them up into the Seat of Tyranny.

For the clearing of these Truths; and first, to manifest the Inconvenience of
permitting any persons to be overgreat in any State; and that Free-States that
have not avoided it, have soon lost their Liberty, we shall produce a File of
Examples. In Greece we find, that the Free State of Athens lost its Liberty
upon that account once, when they suffered certain of the Senators to overtop
the rest in power; which occasioned that multiplied Tyranny, made famous by the
name of the thirty Tyrants: at another time, when by the same Error they were
constrained, through the power of Pistr^tus, to stoop unto his single Tyranny.

Upon this score also, the people of Syracusa had the same misfortune under the
Tyrant Hiero, as had they of Sicily under Dyonlsius and Agathocles.

In Rome also the case is the same too: for during the time that Liberty was
included within the Senate, they gave both Malius and Manlius an opportunity to
aspire, by permitting them a growth of too much Greatness: but by good fortune
escaping their clutches, they afterward fell as foolishly into the hands of
ten of their Fellow-Senators, called the Decemviri, in giving them so much
power as tempted them unto Tyranny. Afterward, when the people scuffled, and
made a shift to recover their Liberty out of the hands of the Senate, they
committed the same Error too, by permitting of their Servants to grow
overgreat; such as Sylla, who by power tyrannized and made himself Dictator for
five years, as Caesar afterward secled the Dictatorship upon himself for ever:
and after Caesar's death, they might have recovered their Liberty again, if
they had taken care (as they might easily have done) to prevent the growing
Greatness of Augustus, who gaining power first, by the courtesy and good will
of the Senate and People, made use of it to establish himself in a Tyranny,
which could never after be extinguished, but in the ruin of the Roman Empire
it self.

Thus also the Free State of Florence foolishly ruined it self by the greatning
of Cosmus; first, permitting him to ingross the Power, which gave him
opportunity to be a tyrant; and then as foolishly forcing him to declare
himself a Tyrant, by an unseasonable demand of the power back out of his hands.
Many more instances might be fetched out of Milan, Switzerland, and other
places: but we have one nearer home, and of a later date, in Holland; whereby,
permitting the Family of Orange to greaten a little more than beseemed a Member
of a Free State, they were insensibly reduced to the last cast, to run the
hazard of the loss of their Liberty.

Therefore one prime Principle of State, is, To keep any man, though he have
deserved never so well by good success or service, from being too great or
popular: it is a notable means (and so esteemed by all Free-States) to keep and
preserve a Commonwealth from the Rapes of Usurpation.

the last, yet not the least) to prove a Free State or Government by the
People, settled in a due and orderly succession of their supreme Assemblies, is
much more excellent than any other Form, is, because in this Form, all Powers
are accountable for misdemeanors in Government, in regard of the nimble Returns
and Periods of the Peoples Election: by which means, he that ere-while was a
Governor, being reduced to the condition of a Subject, lies open to the force
of the Laws, and may with ease be brought to punishment for his offense; so
that after the observation of such a course, others which succeed, will become
the less daring to offend, or to abuse their Trust in Authority, to an
oppression of the People. Such a course as this, cuts the very throat of all
Tyranny; and does not only root it up when at full growth, but crusheth the
Cockatrice in the Egg, destroys it in the Seed, in the principal, and in the
very possiblities of its being for ever after. And as the safety of the People,
is the Sovereign and Supreme Law; so an establishment of this Nature, is an
impregnable Bulwark of the Peoples safety, because without it, no certain
Benefit can be obtained by the ordinary Laws; which if they should be dispensed
by uncontrolable, unaccountable Persons in Power, shall never be interpreted,
but in their own sense; nor executed, but after their own Wills and Pleasure.

Now, this is most certain, That as in the Government of the People, the
successive Revolution of Authority by their consent, has ever been the only
Bank against Inundations of Arbitrary Power and Tyranny; so on the other side,
it is as sure, That all standing Powers have and ever do assume unto themselves
an Arbitrary Exercise of their own dictates at pleasure, and make it their
only Interest to settle themselves in an unaccountable state of Dominion: so
that, though they commit all the injustice in the World, their custom has
been still to persuade men, partly by strong pretense of Argument, and partly
by force, that they may do what they list, and that they are not bound to give
an account of their Actions to any, but to God himself. This Doctrine of
Tyranny has taken the deeper Root in men's minds, because the greatest part
was ever inclined to adore the Golden Idol of Tyranny in every Form: by which
means the rabble of mankind being prejudicated in this particular, and having
placed their corrupt humor or interest in base fawning, and the favor of
present Great Ones; Therefore if any resolute Spirit happen to broach and
maintain true Principles of Freedom, or do at any time arise to so much
courage, as to perform a noble Act of Justice, in calling Tyrants to an
account, presently he draws all the enmity and fury of the World about him. But
in Commonwealths it is and ought to be otherwise; for, in the Monuments of the
Grecian and Roman Freedom, we find, those Nations were wont to heap all the
Honors they could invent, by public Rewards, Consecration of Statues, and
Crowns of Laurel, upon such worthy Patriots: and as if on earth all were too
little, they enrolled them in heaven among the Deities. And all this they did
out of a Noble sense of Commonweal-interest; knowing that the life of Liberty
consists in a strict hand, and zeal against Tyrants and Tyranny, and by keeping
persons in power from all the occasions of it: which cannot be better done,
than (according to the custom of all States that are really free) by leaving
them liable to account: which happiness was never seen yet under the sun, by
any Law or Custom established, save only in those States, where all men are
brought to taste of Subjection as well as Rule, and the Government settled by a
due succession of Authority, by consent of the People.

In Switzerland the people are free indeed, because all Officers and Governors
in the Cantons, are questionable by the People in their successive Assemblies.

The Inference from the foregoing particulars, is easy, That since Freedom is
to be preserved no other way in a Commonwealth, but by keeping Officers and
Governors in an accountable state; and since it appears no standing Powers can
never be called to an account without much difficulty, or involving a Nation in
Blood or Misery. And since a revolution of Government in the Peoples hands,
has ever been the only means to make Governors accountable, and prevent the
inconveniences of Tyranny, Distraction, and Misery; therefore for this, and
those other reasons foregoing, we may conclude, That a Free State, or
Government by the People, settled in a due and orderly succession of their
supreme Assemblies, is far more excellent every way, than any other Form
whatsoever.

ALL OBJECTIONS Against the Government of the People, ANSWERED.
COnsidering, That in times past, the People of this Nation were bred up and
instructed in the brutish Principles of Monarchy, by which means they have been
the more averse from entertaining Notions of a more noble Form: and remembering,
that not long since we were put into a better course, upon the declared
Interest of a Free State, or Commonwealth; I conceived nothing could more
highly tend to the propagation of that good Interest, and the Honor of its
Founders, than to manifest the Inconveniences and ill Consequences of the other
Forms; and so to root up their Principles, that the good People, who but the
other day were invested in the possession of a more excellent way, may (in
order to their re-establishment) understand what Commonwealth-Principles are,
and thereby become the more resolute to defend them against the common Enemy;
learn to be true Commonwealths men, and zealous against Monarchick-Interest, in
all its appearances and encroachments whatsoever. To this end we have* set down
our Position* That a Free State, or Government by the People, settled in a due
and orderly succession of their supreme Assemblies, is the most excellent Form
of Government; which (I humbly conceive) has been sufficiently proved, both by
Reason and Example: but because many pretenses of Objection are in being, and
such as by many are taken for granted; therefore it falls in of course, that we
may refute them: which being done with the same evidence of Reason and Example,
I doubt not but it will stop all the Mouths, not only of Ignorance, but even
of* Malice and Flattery, which have presumed to profane that pure way of a
Free State, or Government by the People.

That Objection of Royalists, and others, which we shall first take notice of,
is this, That the erecting of such a Government would be to set on Levelling
an^ Confusion.

to prevent a return of the Interest of Monarchy: for no Person or Parties
seeking or setting up a private Interest of their own, distinct from the
Public, it will stop the Mouths of all Gainsayers. But the Truth is, This way
of Free State, or Government by the People in their successive Assemblies, is
so far from introducing a community, that it is the only preservative of
Propriety in every particular: the Reasons whereof are plain: for, as on the
one side, it is not in Reason to be imagined, that so choice a Body, as the
Representative of a Nation, should agree to destroy one another in their
several Rights and Interests: on the other side, all Determinations being
carried in this Form by common Consent, every Man's particular Interest must
needs be fairly provided for, against the Arbitrary disposition of others;
therefore, whatever is contrary to this, is levelling indeed; because it
places every Man's Right under the Will of another, and is no less than
Tyranny; which seating it self in an unlimited uncontrollable Prerogative over
others without their Consent, becomes the very bane of propriety; and however
disquieted, or in what Form soever it appears, is indeed the very Interest of
Monarchy.

Now that a Free State, or successive Government of the People, and c. is the
only preservative of Propriety, appears by Instances all the World over; yet
we shall cite but a few.

Under Monarchs, we shall find ever, That the Subjects had nothing that they
could call their own; neither Lives, nor Fortunes, nor Wives, nor any thing
else that the Monarch pleased to command, because the poor people knew no
remedy against the levelling Will of an unbounded Soveraignity; as may be seen
in the Records of all Nations that have stooped under that wretched Form:
whereof we have also very sad Examples in France, and other Kingdoms, at this
very day, where the People have nothing of Propriety; but all depends upon the
Royal Pleasure, as it did of late ^ere in England. Moreover, it is very
observable, That in Kingdoms where the People have enjoyed any thing of Liberty
and Propriety, they have been such Kingdoms only, where the frame of
Government has been so well tempered, as that the best share of it has been
retained in the Peoples Hands; and by how much the greater influence the People
have had therein, so much the more sure and certain they have been, in the
enjoyment of their Propriety.

To pass by many other Instances, consider how firm the Aragonians were in
their Liberties and Properties, so long as they held their hold over their
Kings in their supreme Assemblies; and no sooner had Philip the second deprived
them of their share in the Government, but themselves and their properties
became a prey (and have been ever since) to the Will and Pleasure of their
Kings.

The like also may be said of Erance, where, as long as the Peoples Interest
bore sway in their supreme Assemblies, they could call their Lives and Fortunes
their own, and no longer: for, all that have succeeded since Lewis the
eleventh, followed his levelling pattern so far, that in short time they
destroyed the Peoples Property, and became the greatest Levellers in
Christendom. We were almost at the same pass here in England: for, as long as
the Peoples Interest was preserved by frequent and successive Parliaments; so
long we were in some measure secure of our Properties: but as Kings began to
worm the People out of their share in Government, by discontinuing of
Parliaments; So they carried on their levelling design, to the destroying of
our Properties; and had by this means brought it so high, that the Oracles of
the Law and Gospel spoke it out with a good levelling Grace, That all was the
King's and that we had nothing we might call our own.

Thus you see how much Levelling, and little of Propriety, the people h^^e had
certain under Monarchs; and if any at all, by what means, and upon what terms
they have had it. Nor has it been thus only under Kings; but we find, the
People have ever had as little of Property secure, under all other Forms of
standing Powers; which have produced as errant Levellers in this particular, as
any of the Monarchies. In the Free State of Athens, as long as the People kept
free indeed, in an enjoyment of their successive Assemblies, so long they were
secure in their Properties, and no longer. For, to say nothing of their Kings,
whose History is very obscure, we find, after they were laid side, they
erected another Form of standing Power, in a single Person, called, a
Governor, for Life; who was also accountable for misdemeanors: but yet a
Trial being made of nine of them, the People saw so little security by them,
that they pitched upon another standing Form of Decimal Government; and being
oppressed by them too, they were cashiered. The like miseries they tasted under
the standing power of Thirty, which were a sort of Levellers more rank than all
the rest; who put to death, banish^d, pill'd, and poll'd whom they pleased,
without Cause or Exception; so that the poor people having been tormented under
all the Forms of standing Power, were in the end forced (as their last remedy)
to take Sanctuary under the Form of a Free - State, in their successive
Assemblies.

And though it may be objected, That afterward they fell into many divisions
and miseries, even in that Form: yet whoever observes the Story, shall find,
it was not the fault of the Government, but of themselves, in swerving from the
Rules of a Free State, by permitting the continuance of Power in particular
hands; who having an opportunity thereby to create Parties of their own among
the People, did for their own ends, inveigle, engage, and entangle them in
popular Tumults and Divisions. This was the true Reason of their Miscarriages.
And if ever any Government of the People did miscarry, it was upon that account.

Thus also the Lacedaemonians, after they had for some years tried the
Government of one King, then of two Kings at once of two distinct Families;
afterward came in the Ephori, as Supervisers of their Kings: after (I say)
they had tried themselves through all the Forms of a standing Power, and found
them all to be Levellers of the Peoples Interest and Property, then necessity
taught them to seek shelter in a Free State, under which they lived happily,
till by a forementioned Error of the Athenians, they were drawn into Parties by
powerful Persons, and so made the Instruments of Division among themselves, for
the bringing of new Levellers into play; such as were Manchanidas and Nabis,
who succeeded each other in a Tyranny.

In old Rome, after the standing Form of Kings was extinct, and a new one
established, the people found as little of safety and property as ever: for,
the standing Senate, and the Decemviri, proved as great Levellers, as Kings: so
that they were forced to settle the Government of the People by a due and
orderly succession of their supreme Assemblies. Then they began again to
recover their property, in having somewhat they might call their own; and they
happily enjoyed it, till, as by the same Error of the Lacedaemonians and
Athenians, swerving from the Rules of a Free State, lengthning of power in
particular hands, they were drawn and divided into Parties, to serve the lusts
of such powerful men as by craft became their Leaders: so that by this means
(through their own default) they were deprived of their Liberty long before the
days of Imperial Tytanny. Thus Cinna, Sylla, Marins, and the rest of that
succeeding Gang, down to Caesar, used the Peoples favor, to obtain a
continuation of power in their own hands; and then having sadled the people
with a new standing Form of their own, they immediately rooted up the Peoples
Liberty and Property, by Arbitrary Sentences of death, Proscriptions, Fines,
and Confiscations: which strain of levelling, (more intolerable than the
former) was maintained by the same Arts of Devilish Policy down to Caesar; who
striking in a Favorite of the People, and making use of their Affections to
lengthen power in his own hands: at length, by this Error of the people,
gained opportunity to introduce a new levelling Form of standing power in
himself, to an utter and irrecoverable ruin of the Roman Liberty and property.

In Florence they have been in the same case there, under every Form of
standing power. It was so, when the Great Ones ruled: it was so under Goderino,
it was so under Savanarola the Monk. When they once began to lengthen power by
the peoples Favor, they presently fell to levelling and domineering, as did
Cosmus afterward, that crafty Founder of the present Dukedom.

Upon the same terms, the Republic of Pisa lost themselves, and became the
prey of several Usurpations.

Mantua was once a Free-City of the Empire; but neglecting their successive
Assemblies, and permitting the Great Ones, and most Wealthy, to form a standing
power in themselves: the people were so vexed with them, that one Pafferimo
getting power in his own hands, and then lengthening it by Artifice, turned
Leveller too, subjecting all to his own will; so that the poor people, to rid
their hands of him, were forced to pitch upon another, as bad, and translate
their power into a petty Dukedom, in the hands of the Family of Gonzaga.

We may from hence safely conclude against all objecting Monarchs and
Royalists, of what name and Title soever, that a Free State or Commonwealth by
the people in their successive Assemblies is so far from levelling or
destroying property, that in all ages it has been the only preservative of
Liberty and property, and the only remedy against the Levellings and
Usurpations of standing powers: for, it is clear, That Kings and all standing
powers are the Levellers.

A second Objection in the Mouths of many, is this, That the erecting of such a
Form in the Peoples hands, were the ready way to cause confusion in Government;
when all persons (without distinction) are allowed a right to choose and be
chosen members of the supreme Assemblies.

a former Government, and those that stood for it; in which case it even has a
great party within it self, that are enemies to its establishment.

As to the first, to wit, a Commonwealth in its settled and composed state, when
all men within it are presumed to be its Friends, questionless, a right to
choose and to be chosen, is then to be allowed the people, (without distinction)
in as great a latitude, as may stand with right Reason and Convenience, for
managing a matter of so high Consequence as their Supreme Assemblies; wherein
somewhat must be left to humane Prudence; and therefore that latitude being to
be admitted more or less, according to the Nature, Circumstance, and
Necessities of any Nation, is not here to be determined.

But as to a Commonwealth under the second consideration, when it is founding,
or newly founded, in the close of a Civil War, upon the mine of a former
Government; In this case, (I say) to make no distinction betwixt men; but to
allow the conquered part of the people an equal right to choose and to be
chosen, and c. were not only to take away all proportion in policy, but the
ready way to destroy the Commonwealth, and by a promiscuous mixture of opposite
Interests, to turn all into confusion.

Now, that the Enemies of Liberty, being subdued upon the close of a Civil War,
are not to be allowed sharers in the Rights of the people, is evident, for
diverse Reasons: not only because such an allowance would be a means to give
them opportunity to sow the seeds of new Broyls and Divisions, and bring a new
hazard upon the Liberties of the People, (which are Reasons derived from
Convenience: but there is a more special Argument from the equity of the thing,
according to the Law and Custom of Nations, That such as have commenced War, to
serve the Lusts of Tyrants against the Peoples Interest, should not be received
any longer a part of the people, but may be handled as slaves when subdued, if
their Subduers please so to use them; because by their Treasons against the
Majesty of the people, (which they ought to have maintained) they have made
forfeiture of all their Rights and Privileges, as Members of the People; and
therefore if it happens in this case at any time, That any Immunities,
Properties or Enjoyments be indulged unto them, they must not take them as
their own by Right, but as Boons bestowed upon them by the peoples courtesy.

The old Commonwealth of Greece was very severe in this particular: for, as
they were wont to heap up all Honors they could vent, upon such as did or
suffered any thing for the maintenance of their Liberty; so, on the other side,
they punished the Underminers of it, or those that any ways appeared against
it, with utmost extremity; persecuting them with For Feitures, both of Life and
Fortune; and if they escaped with Life, they usually became slaves: and many
times they persecuted them, being dead, branding their Memories with an Eternal
Mark of Infamy.

In old Rome they dealt more mildly with the greatest part of those that had
sided with the Tarquins after their Expulsion: but yet they were not restored
to all their former Privileges. In process of time, as often as any conspired
against the Peoples Interest, in their successive Assemblies; after they had
once gotten them, themselves were banished, and their Estates confiscated, not
excepting many of the Senators, as well as others; and made for ever incapable
of any Trust in the Commonwealth.

Afterward, they took the same course with as many of Catiline's
Fellow-Traytors and Conspirators, as were worthy any thing; and had no doubt
sufficiently paid Caesar's Abettors in the same Coin, but that he wore out all
opposites with his prosperous Treason. Thus Millain, and the rest of those
States, when they were free, as also the Swisses and Hollanders, in the Infancy
of the Helvetian and Belgic Freedoms, who took the same course with all those
uunatural Paricides and Apostates, that offered first to strangle their Liberty
in the Birth, or afterward in the Cradle, by secret Conspiracy, or open
violence. Nor ought this to seem strange, since if a right of Conquest may be
used over a Forain, who only is to be accounted a fair enemy: much more
against such, as against the light of Nature, shall engage themselves in so
foul practices, as tend to ruin the Liberty of their Native Country.

Seeing therefore that the people in their Government, upon all occasions of
Civil War against their Liberties, have been most zealous in vindicating those
Attempts upon the heads of the Conspirators: seeing also, that upon the close
of a Civil War, they have a Right; and not only a Right, but usually a very
great Resolution to keep out those Enemies of Liberty, whom they conquer, from
a participation of any Right in Government: therefore in this case also, as
well as the former, we may conclude, That they in their successive Assemblies,
are so far from levelling the Interest of Government into all hands, without
distinction, that their principal care is ever to preserve it in their own, to
prevent the return of new Wars, old Interests, and Confusion.

But there is a third Objection against it, drawn from a pretending
inconvenience of such a succession; alleging, That the management of
State Affairs requires Judgment and Experience; which is not to be expected
from new Members coming into those Assemblies upon every ^lection.

Act a Imperi, and Arcan a Imperii* that is, Acts of State, and Secrets of
State. By Acts of State, we mean the Laws and Ordinances of the Legislative
Power: these are the things that have most influence upon a Commenwealth, to
its ill or well-being; and are the only Remedies for such bad Customs,
Inconveniences, and Encroachments as afflict and grieve it. Wherefor^, matters
of grievance being matters of common sense, and such are obvious to the people,
who best know where the shoe pinches them; certainly, there is no need of any
great skill or judgment in passing or applying a Law for Remedy, which is the
proper work of the people in their supreme Assemblies; and such, as every
ordinary* Understanding is instructed in by the Light of Nature: so that, as to
this, there can be no danger by instituting an orderly succession of the people.

But as for those things called Ar^ana Imperii, Secrets of State, or the
executive part of Government, during the Intervals of their Supreme Assemblies;
these things being of a Nature remote from ordinary apprehensions, and such as
necessarily require prudence, time, and experience, to fit men for management:
Much in Reason may be said, and must be granted, for the continuation of such
Trusts in the same hands, as relate to matter of Counsel, or Administration of
justice, more ^r less, according to their good or ill-behaviour. A prudential
continuation of these, may (without question) and ought to be all^wed upon
discretion; because, if the^ do amiss, they are easily accountable to the
peoples Assemblies. But now the case is otherwise, as to these Supreme
Assemblies, where a few, easy, necessary things, such as common sense and
reason instruct men in, are the fittest things for them to apply themselves
unto: and there the Peoples Trustees are to continue, of right, no longer than
mere Necessity requires, for their own redress and safety; which being provided
for, they are to return into a condition of Subjection and Obedience, with the
rest of the people, to such Laws and Government as themselves have erected: by
which means alone, they will be able to know whether they have done well or
ill, when they feel the effects of what they have done. Otherwise, if any thing
happen to be done amiss, what way can there be for remedy? since no Appeal is
to be had from the Supreme Body of the People, except a due course of
Succession be preserved from hand to hand, by the Peoples choice; and other
persons thereupon admitted (upon the same terms) into the same Autho^ity.

This is the truth, as we have made manifest both by Reason and Example:
therefore we shall add a little to our former Discourse, by way of
Illustration.

In Athens, when governed by the People, we find, it was their course to
uph^ld constant returns and periods of Succession in their Supreme Assemblies,
for remedy of Grievances; and they had a standing Council, called the
Areop^g^^, to whom all their Secrets of State were committed, together with the
administration of Government during the Intervals of those Assemblies, at whose
return they were accountable; and warily continued, or excluded, as the People
found cause*

In Sparta they had the like; as also in Rome, after the People had once got
their successive Assemblies, wherein they passed Laws for Government: and not
knowing how to be rid of their hereditary Senate, they permitted them and their
sami^ies to continue a standing Council; but yet controllable by, and
accountable to their Assemblies, who secluded and banished many of them for
their misdemeanors: so that by this means* the people had an opportunity to
make use of their Wisdom, and curb their Ambi^ion.

In Florence (when free) the Government was after the same Mode.

In Holland also, and Switzerland, they have their Supreme Assemblies frequent
by Election, with exceeding benefit, but no prejudice to Affairs: for the
frequencie of those successive Meetings, preserves their Liberty, and provides
Laws; the Execution whereof is committed to others, and affairs of State to a
Council of their own choice, accountable to themselves: where their
State-concernments very seldom miscarry, because they place and displace their
Counselors with extraordinary care and caution.

By these particulars, you may perceive the vanity of the aforesaid Objection,
and how slender a pretense it is against that excellent course of Successive
Assemblies; since affairs of State are as well disposed (or rather better)
under this Form, than any other.

A fourth Objection commonly used That such a Government brings great Damage to
the Public, by their frequent Discontents, Divisions, and Tumults, that arise
within it.

For answer to this, it is requisite that we take notice of those Occasions
which are the common causes of such humors in this Form: which being once
known, it will easily appear whence those Inconveniences do arise, and not from
any default in the nature of the Government: they are commonly these three.

First, when any of their fellow-Citizens, or Members of the Commonweal, shall
arrogate any thing of Power and Privilege unto themselves, or their Families,
whereby to Grandize or greaten themselves, beyond the ordinary size and
standard of the People. We find thi^ to be most true, by the course of affairs
in the Roman State, as they are recorded by Livy; who plainly shows, that upon
the expulsion of the Tarquins, though the Senate introduced a new Government,
yet their retaining the power of the old within the hands of themselves and
their Families, was the occasion of all those after-Discontents and Tumults
that arose among the People. For, had Brutus made them free, when he declared
them so; or had the Senate a little after, followed the advice and example of
Publicola, and some others as honest as he; all occasion of Discontent had been
taken away: but when the People saw the Senators seated in a lofty posture over
them; when they felt the weight of that State and Dignity pressing upon
shoulders that were promised to be at ease, and free; when they found
themselves exempted from the enjoyment of the same common Privileges, excluded
from all Offices, or Alliance with the Senators; their purses emptied of Money,
their bellies of Meat, and their hearts of Hope: then it was, that they began
to grumble and mutiny; and never until they got a power to bridle the Great
ones, by an happy succession of their Supreme Assemblies.

A second Occasion of the peoples being inclined to Discontent and Tumult,
under their Free Form of Government, appears in Story to be this: When they
felt themselves not fairly dealt withal, by such as became their Leaders and
Generals. Thus in Syracusa, Dionysius clothing himself with a pretense of the
peoples Liberties; and being by that means made their General, and then making
use of that power to other ends than was pretended, became the Firebrand of
that State, and put the people all into Flames, for the expulsion of him, who
had made a Forfeiture of all his glorious pretenses.

Thus in Sparta the people were peaceable enough under their own Government,
till they found themselves overreached, and their credulity abused by such as
they trusted, whose designs were laid in the dark, for the converting of
Liberty into Tyranny, under Manchanidas and Nabis. In old Rome, under the
peoples Government, it is true, it was a sad sight oftentimes to see the people
swarming in tumults, their shops shut up, and all trading given over throughout
the City, and sometimes the City forsaken and left empty.

But here, as also in Ath^ns, the Occasion was the same: for, as the people
naturally love Peace and Ease; so finding themselves often outwitted and
abused by the slights and fears of the Senate, they presently (as it is their
Nature upon such Occasions) grew out of all patience. The case was the same
also, when any one of their Senators, or of themselves, arrived to any height
of power by insinuating into the peoples favor, upon specious and popular
pretenses, and then made a forfeiture of those pretenses, by taking a contrary
course. Thus Sylla of the Senatorian order, and Marius of the Plebeian, both
got power into their hands, upon pretense of the peoples good, (as many others
did before and after, not only in Rome, but in other Free-States also) but
forfeiting their pretenses by taking Arbitrary courses, they were the sole
Causes of all those Tumults and Slaughters among the Romans, the infamy
whereof has most injuriously been cast upon the peoples Government, by the
profane pens of such as have been bold in Pension or Relation in the Courts of
Princes.

Thus Caesar also himself, striking as a Favorite of the people upon fair
pretenses, and forfeiting them, when in power, was the only cause of all those
succeeding Civil Broils and Tragedies among the people.

A third Occasion of the Peoples being inclined to Discontent and Tumult in a
Free State, is this, when they are sensible of Oppression. For, I say again,
The people are naturally of a peaceable temper, minding nothing, but a free
Enjoyment: but if once they find themselves circumvented, misled, or squeezed
by such as they have entrusted, then they swell like the Sea, and overrun the
Bounds of Just and Honest, ruining all before them.

In a word, there is not one precedent of Tumults or Sedition can be cited out
of all Stories, by the Enemies of Freedom, against the peoples Government; but
it will appear likewise thereby, that the people were not in fault, but either
drawn in, or provoked thereto, by the Craft or Injustice of such fair
Pretenders as have had byends of their own, and by-designs upon the public
Liberty.

Nevertheless, admit that the people were tumultuous in their own Nature; yet
those Tumults (when they happen) are more easily to be borne, than these
Inconveniences that arise from the Tyranny of Monarchs and Great Ones: for
popular Tumults have these three Qualities:

First, The Injury of them never extends further than some few Persons; and
those (for the most part) guilty enough; as were the thirty Grandees in Athens,
the Ten in Rome, and those other State-Mountebanks, that suffered for their
Practices by the Peoples Fury.

Secondly, Those Tumults are not lasting, but (like fits) quickly over: for, an
Eloquent Oration, or Persuasion, (as we see in the Example of Menenius Agrippa)
or the Reputation of some grave or honest Man, (as in the Example of Virginus,
and afterward of Cato) does very easily reduce and pacify them.

Thirdly, The ending of those Tumults, though they have ruined some
particulars, yet it appears they have usually turned to the good of the
Public: for we s^^, that both in Athens and Rome, the Great Ones were by this
means kept in awe from Injustice; the Spirits of the people were kept warm with
high thoughts of themselves and their Liberty (which turned much to the
enlargement of their Empire.)

And lastly, By this means they came off always with good Laws for their
profit, (as in the case of the Law of twelve Tables, brought from Athens to
Rome) or else with an Augmentation of their Immunities, and Privileges (as in
the case of procuring the Tribunes, and their Supreme Assemblies) and
afterward in the frequent confirmation of them against the Encroachments of
the Nobles.

Now the case is far otherwise under the standing power of the Great Ones;
they, in their Counsels, Projects, and Designs, are fast and tenacious; so that
the Evils under those Forms are more remediless. Besides, they reach to the
whole Body of a Commonweal: and so the Evils are more Universal. And lastly,
those Tumults, Quarrels, and Inconveniences that arise from among them, never
tend nor end, but to the farther oppression and suppression of the people in
their Interest and Propriety.

For conclusion then: by these particulars you may plainly see the vanity of
this Objection about Tumults, how far they are from being natural effects of
the Peoples Government; insomuch, as by the Records of History, it appears
rather that they have been the necessary consequences of such Tricks and Cheats
of Great Men, as in the days of yore have been put upon the people.

little security is to be had therein for the more wealthy and powerful sort of
men, in regard of that Liberty which the people assume unto themselves, to
accuse or calumniate whom they please upon any occasion.

For answer to this, know, That calumniation (which signifies ambitious
slandering of men, by whisperings, reports, or false accusations) was never
allowed or approved in this Form of Government. It Is true indeed, that such
Extravagancies there have been (more or less) in all Forms whatsoever; but in
this, less than any: it being most in use under standing Powers of Great ones,
who make it their grand Engine to remove or ruin all persons that stand in the
way of them and their designs: And for this purpose, it has ever been their
common custom to have Instruments ready at hand; as we see in all the Stories
of Kings and Grandees from time to time; yea, and by Aristotle himself,
together with the whole train of Commentators, it is particularly marked out
inter flagitia Dominationis, to be one of the peculiar enormities that attend
the Lordly interest of Dominion.

The Roman State, after it grew corrupt, is a sufficient Instance; where we
find, that not only the ten Grandees, but all that succeeded them in that
domineering humor over the People, ever kept a Retinue well stocked with
Calumniators and Informers, (such as we call Knights of the Post) to snap those
that in any wise appeared for the Peoples Liberties. This was their constant
trade, as it was afterward also of their Emperors. But all the while that the
People kept their power entire in the Supreme Assemblies, we read not of its
being brought into any constant practice. Sometimes indeed, those great
Commanders that had done them many eminent Services, were, by reason of some
after-actions, called to an account; and having, by an ingro^ment of Power,
rendered themselves suspected, and burdensome to the Commonwealth, were
commanded to retire, (as were both the Scipio's.)

And in the Stories of the Athenian Commonwealth, we find, that by their lofty
and unwary carriage, they stirred up the Peoples fear and jealousy so far, as
to question and send diverse of them into B^^ishment, notwithstanding all their
former merits; as we read of Alcibtades, Themistocles, and others: whereas, if
the Rules of a Free State had been punctually observed, by preserving a
discreet revolution of Powers, and an equability, or moderate state of
particular persons, there had been no occasion of Incroachment on the one part,
or of Fear on the other; not could the prying Royalist have had the least
pretense or shadow of Invective against the Peoples Government in this
particular.

Thus much of Calumniation, which is less frequent under the Peoples Form, than
any other.

Now as to the point of Accusing, or liberty of Accusation by the People,
before their Supreme Assemblies; it is a thing so essentially necessary for the
preservation of a Commonwealth, that there is no possibility of having persons
kept accountable without it; and, by consequence, no security of Life and
Estate, Liberty and Property. And of what excellent use this is, for the
public benefit of any State, appears in these two particulars.

First, it is apparent, that the reason wherefore Kings, and all other standing
Powers, have presumed to abuse the People, is, because their continuation of
Authority having been a means to state them in a condition of Impunity, the
People either durst not, or could not assume a liberty of Accusation; and so
have lingered without remedy, whilst Great Men have proceeded without control
to an Augmentation of their misery: whereas if a just Liberty of Accusation be
kept in ure, and Great Persons by this means lie liable to questioning, the
Commonwealth must needs be the more secure; because none then will dare to
entrench, or attempt ought, against their Liberty; and in case any do, they may
with much ease be suppressed. All which amounts, in effect, to a full
confirmation of this most excellent Maxim, recorded in Policy: Maxim
interest Repub. Libertatis, ut libere possis ^vem aliquem accusare: It most
highly concerns the Freedom of a Commonwealth, that the People have liberty of
accusing any persons whatsoever.

Secondly, it appears, this Liberty is most necessary, because, as it has been
the only Remedy against the Injustice of great and powerful persons; so it
has been the only means to extinguish those Emulations, Jealousies, and
Suspicions, which usually abound with fury in men's minds, when they see such
persons seated so far above, that they are not able to reach them, or bring
them (as it becomes all earthly Powers) to an account of their actions: of
which Liberty when the People have seen themselves deprived in time past, it is
sad to consider how they have flown out into such absurd and extraordinary
courses, in hope of Remedy, as have caused not only Distraction, but many
times utter Ruin, to the Public. Most of those Tumults in old Rome, were
occasioned for want of this liberty in ordinary; as those that happened under
the Decemviri: so that the People, not having freedom to accuse and question
their Justice, were enflamed to commit sudden Outrages, to be revenged upon
them. But when they had once obtained power to accuse or question any man, by
assistance of their Tribunes; then we meet with none of those heats and fits
among them; but they referred themselves over, with much content, to the
ordinary course of proceeding. A pregnant Instance whereof, we have in the Case
of Coriolanus; who having done some injury to the people, they finding him
befriended and upheld by the Great ones, resolved to be revenged upon him with
their own hands; and had torn him in pieces as he came out of the Senate, but
that the Tribunes immediately stepped in, and not only promised, but appointed
them a day of Hearing against him; and so all was calm again, and quiet:
whereas, if this ordinary course of Remedy, in calling him to account, had not
been allowed, and he been destroyed in a Mutiny, a world of sad Consequences
must have befallen the Commonwealth, by reason of those Enormities and Revenges
that would have risen, upon the ruin of so considerable a person.

In the Stories of Florence also, we read of one Valesius, who greatning
himself into little less than the posture of a Prince in that Republike, he so
confirmed himself, that the people not being able to regulate his
extravagancies by any ordinary proceedings, they betook themselves to that
unhappie remedy of Arms; and it cost the best blood and lives in that State,
before they could bring him down: involving them in a world of Miseries, which
might have been avoided, had they taken care to preserve their old Liberty of
Accusation and Que^^ion, and being able to take a course with him in an
ordinary way of progress.

Thus also in the same State, Soderino, a man of the same size, interest, and
humor; when the People saw that they had lost their Liberty, in being unable
to question him, ran like madmen upon a Remedy as bad as the Disease, and
called in the Spaniard to suppress him: so that turned almost to the ruin of
the State, which might have been prevented, could they have repressed him by
the ordinary way of Accusation and Question.

From these Premises, then, let us conclude, That seeing the crooked way of
Calumniation is less used under the Peoples Form of Government, than any other:
and since the retaining of a Regular course, for admitting and deciding of all
Complaints and Controversies by way of Accusation, is of absolute necessity to
the safety and wellbeing of a Commonwealth; Therefore this Objection is of as
little weight as the rest, so as in any wise to diminish the Dignity and
Reputation of a Free State, or Government by the People in their successive
Assemblies.

That People by nature are factious, inconstant, and ungrateful.

For answer, first, as to the point of being Factious, we have already shown,
that this Government, stated in a succession of its Supreme Assemblies, is the
only preventive of Faction; because, in creating a Faction, there is a
necessity, that those which endeavor it, must have opportunity to improve their
slights and projects, in disgnising their Designs; drawing in Instruments and
Parties, and in worming out Opposites: the effecting of all which, requires
some length of time; which cannot be had, and consequently, no Faction formed,
when Government is not fixed in particular persons, but managed by due
succession and revolution of Authority in the hands of the People.

Besides, it is to be considered, that the People are never the first or
principal in Faction: they are never the authors and contrivers of it, but ever
the parties that are drawn into Sidings by the influence of standing Powers, to
serve their interests and designs.

Thus Sylla and Marius, Pompey and Caesar, continuing power in their own hands,
cleft the Roman Empire at several times into several Parties: as afterward it
was cleft into three by the Triumvirate; wherein the people had no hand, being
(as they are always) purely passive, and passionately divided, according as
they were wrought upon by the sub^il Insinuations of the prime Engineers of
each Faction.

Thus Italy was divided into Guelph and Gib^ll^ne; and France torn in two by
the two Families of Orleance and Burgundi: also, by the Guisians and their
Confederates; wherein the people had no further hand, than as they were acted
by the persuasions and pretenses of two powerful parties.

The case also was the same in England, in times past, when the Grandee-Game
was in action between the two Families of York and Lancaster. So that it is
clear enough, The people in their own nature are not inclined to be Factious,
nor are they ever engaged that way, farther than as their Nature is abused, and
drawn in by powerful persons.

The second particular of this Objection, is Inconstancy; which holds true
indeed in them that are debauched, and in the corrupted State of a
Commonwealth, when degenerated from its pure Principles; as we find in that of
Athens, Rome, Florence, and others: but yet in Rome you may see as pregnant
instances of that peoples constancy, as of any other sort of men whatsoever:
for, they continued constant irreconcilable Enemies to all Tyranny in general,
and Kingly power in particular.

In like manner, when they had once gotten their successive Assemblies, they
remained so firm and stiff to uphold them, that the succeeding Tyrants could
not in a long time, nor without extraordinary cunning and caution deprive them
of that only Evidence of their Liberty.

Moreover, it is observable of this people, That in making their Elections they
could never be persuaded to choose a known Infamous, Vicious, or unworthy
Fellow; so that they seldom or never erred in the choice of their Tribunes and
other Officers. And as in the framing of Laws, their aim was ever at the
general Good, it being their own Interest, quatenus the people; so their
constancy in the conservation of those Laws was most remarkable: for,
notwithstanding all the crafty Devices and Fetches of the Nobles, the people
could never be wooed to a consent of abrogating any one Law, till by the
alteration of Time, Affairs, and other Circumstances, it did plainly appear
inconvenient.

But the case has ever been otherwise under Kings and all standing Powers, who
usually ran into all the extremes of Inconstancy, upon every new Project, petty
Humor, and Occasion, that seemed favorable for effecting of their by-designs.
And in order hereunto, Stories will inform you, That it has been their
Custom, to shift Principles every Moon, and cashier all Oaths, Protestations,
Promises, and Engagements, and blot out the Memory of them with a wet Finger.

This was very remarkable in the late King, whose inconstancy in this kind,
was beyond compare; who no sooner had passed any Promises, made Vows and
Protestations, fixed Appeals in the High Court of Heaven, in the behalf of
Himself and his Family; but presently he forfeited all, and cancelled them by
his Actions.

As to the third point, of Ingratitude, it is much charged upon this Form of
Government; because we read both in Athens and Rome, of diverse unhandsome
Returns made to some worthy Persons that had done high services for those
Commonwealths; as Alcibiades, The^istocles, Phocion, Milt^ades, Furius,
Camillus, Coriolanus, and both the Scipio's; the cause of whose misfortunes is
described by Plutarch and Livy, to be their own lofty and unwary carriage;
Having (say they) by an ingrossment of power, rendered themselves suspected and
buthensome to the Commonwealth, and thereby stirred up the peoples fear and
jealousy: where as if they had kept themselves within the Rules of a
Free State, by permitting a disceet Revolution of power in particular hands;
there had been no occasion of incroachment on the one part, nor of fear on the
other. Of all, the Scipio's indeed were most to be pitied, because their only
fault seems to be too much power and grearness, (which indeed is the greatest
fault that Members of a Commonwealth can be guilty of, if seriously
considered;) insomuch, that being grown formidable to their Fellow-Senators,
they were by them removed: and so it appears to have been the act of the
Nobles, (upon their own score and Interest) and not of the people. But as for
Camillus and Coriolanus, they sufficiently deserved whatsoever befell them,
because they made use of the power and reputation they had gotten by their
former merits, only to malign and exercise an implacable hate toward the
peoples Interest. Nevertheless, the people restored Camillus again to his
Estate and Honor, after some little time of Banishment.

And though this accident in a Free State has been objected by many, as a
great deffect; yet others again do highly commend the humor: For (say they) it
is not only a good sign of a Commonwealths being in pure and perfect health,
when the people are thus active, zealous, and jealous in the behalf of their
Liberties, that will permit no such growth of power as may endanger it; but it
is also a convenient means to curb the Ambition of its Citizens, and make them
contain within due bounds, when they see there is no presuming after
Inlargements, and Accessions of Powers and Greatness, without incurring the
danger and indignation of the people.

Thus much of the Reason why the people many times cast off persons that have
done them eminent services: yet on the other side, they were so far from
Ingratitude, that they have always been excessive in their Rewards and
Honors, to such men as deserved any way of the Public, whilst they conformed
themselves to Rules, and kept in a posture suiting to Liberty. Witness their
Consecration of Statues, Incense, Sacrifices, and Crowns of Laurel, inrolling
such men in the number of their Deities.

Therefore the crime of Ingratitude cannot in any peculiar manner be fastened
upon the People: but if we consult the Stories of all standing Powers, we may
produce innumerable testimonies of their Ingratitude toward such as have done
them the greatest service; ill recompense being a Mystery of State practiced by
all Kings and Grandees, who (as Tacitus tells us) ever count themselves
disobliged, by the bravest actions of their subjects.

Upon this account, Alexander hated Antipater and Parmenio, and put the later
to death. Thus the Emperor Vespasian cashiered and ruined the meritorious
Antonies. Thus also was Alphonsus Atbuquerque served by his Master the King of
Portugal; and Consalvus the Great, by Ferdinand of Aragon: as was also that
Stanley of the House of Derby, who set the Crown upon King H^nry the seventh's
head. Thus Sylla the Roman Grandee destroyed his choicest Instruments that
helped him into the Saddle; as Augustus served his friend Cicero, and exposed
him to the malice and murder of Anthony.

Innumerable are the Examples of this kind, which evidence, that such unworthy
dealings are the effect of all standing Powers; and therefore more properly to
be objected against them, than against the Government of the People.

Thus having answered all, or the main Objections, brought by the adversaries
of a Free State; before we proceed to the Errors of Government, and Rules of
Policy, it will not be amiss, but very convenient, to say something of that
which indeed is the very Foundation of all the rest; to wit, That the Original
of all Just Power and Government is in the PEOPLE.

The Original of all Just Power is in the People.
THose Men that deny this Position, are fain to run up as high as Noah and
Adam, to gain a pretense for their Opinion: alleging, That the primitive or
first Governments of the World were not instituted by the consent and election
of those that were governed, but by an absolute Authority invested in the
persons governing. Thus th^^ say our first Parent ruled, by a (...) Power and
Authority in himself only, as did also the Patriarchs before and after the
Flood too, for some time, becoming Princes by virtue of a paternal right over
all the Families of their own Generation and Extraction: so that the Fathers,
by reason of their extraordinary long Lives, and the multiplicity of Wives,
happened to be Lords of Kingdoms or Principalities of their own begetting.

And so some deriving the Pedigree or Government of this Paternal Right of
Sovereignty, would by all means conclude, That the Original of Government,
neither was nor ought to be in the People.

For answer to this, consider, That Magistracy or Government is to be
considered, as Natural, or as Political: Naturally he was a true public
Magistrate or Father of his Country, who in those Patriarchal times ruled over
his own Children and their Descendants. This Form of Government was only
temporary, and took an end not long after the Flood, when Nimrod changed it,
and by force combining (...) of distinct Families into one Bod^ (...)
subjecting them to his own Regiment, did, by an Arbitrary Power, seated in his
own Will and Sword, constrain them to submit unto what Laws and Conditions
himself pleased to impose on them.

Thus the Paternal Form became changed into a Tyrannical. Neither of these had
(I confess) their Original in or from the People, nor has either of them any
relation to that Government which we intend in our Position.

But secondly, There is a Government Political, not grounded in Nature, nor
upon Paternal Right by Natural Generation; but founded upon the free Election,
Consent or mutual Compact of men entering into a form of civil society. This is
the Government we now speak of, it having been in request in most ages, and
still is: whereas the other was long since out of date, being used only in the
first age of the World, as proper only for that time.

So that to prevent all Objections of this nature, when we speak here of
Government, we mean only the Political, which is by Consent or Compact; whose
original we shall prove to be in the people. As for the Government of the
Israelites, first under Moses, then Joshua and the Judges; The Scripture
plainly shows, that they were extraordi^nary Governors, being of God's
immediate institution, who raised them up by his Spirit, and imposed them upon
that people; whose peculiar happiness it was in cases of this nature, to have
so infallible and sure a direction; so that their Government was a Theocracie,
(as some have called it) having God himself for its only Original: and
therefore no wonder we have in that time and Nation, so few visible footsteps
of the peoples Election, or of an institution by Compact. But yet we find
after the Judges, when this people rejected this more immediate way of
Government by God, (as the Lord told Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but
me) and dedesired a Government after the manner of other Nations; then God
seems to forbear the use of his Prerogative, and leave them to an exercise of
their own natural Rights and Liberties, to make choice of a new Government and
Governor by suffrage and compact.

The Government they aimed at, was Kingly: God himself was displeased at it,
and so was Samuel too; who, in hope to continue the old Form, and to fright
them from the new, tells them, what Monsters in Government Kings would prove,
by assuming unto themselves an Arbitrary Power, (not that a King might lawfully
and by right do what Samuel describes, but only to show how far Kings would
presume to abuse their power; which no doubt Samuel foresaw, not only by
Reason, but by the Spirit of Prophecy.) Nevertheless the people would have a
King; say they, Nay, but there shall be a King over us: whereupon, says God to
Samuel, Hearken to their voice. Where we plainly see; first, God gives them
leave to use their own natural Rights, in making choice of their own Form of
Government; but then indeed, for the choice of their Governor, there was one
thing extraordinary, in that God appointed them one, he vouchsafing still in an
extraordinary and immediate manner to be their Director and Protector: but yet,
though God was pleased to nominate the person, he left the confirmation and
ratification of the Kingship unto the people; to show, that naturally the right
of all was in them, however the exercise of it were superseded at that time, by
his Divine pleasure, as to the point of nomination: for, that the people might
understand it was their Right, Samuel calls them all to Mizpeh, as if the
matter were all to be done anew on their part; and there by lot, they at length
made choice of Saul, and so immediately by proclaiming him with shouts and
acclamations: and then having had proof of his valor against the Amorites,
they meet at Gilgal, and proclaim him King once again, to show that (naturally)
the validity of the Kingship depended wholly upon the peoples consent and
confirmation. And so you see the first and most eminent evidence of the
institution of Political Government in Scripture does notoriously demonstrate,
that its original is in or from the people; and therefore I shall wave any
further instances in cases of the like nature out of Scripture, which are not a
few. Only let it be remembered, that Peter in his first Epistle, calls all
Government the Ordinance of man, (in the Original, the creation of man, a
Creature of a man's making) to show, that in all its forms it depends only upon
the will and pleasure of the people.

We might insist farther to evince the Truth of this by strength of Reason; but
let this serve to assert the right of the thing; and as for the rest, every man
will easily believe it very consonant to reason, if he reflect upon the matter
of fact, and consider, that it has been the unanimous practice of all the
Nations of the World, to assert their own Rights of Election and Consent (as
often as they had opportunity) in the various turns of institution and
alteration of Government. In Italy of old they had most Free-States, and few
Princes; now all Princes, and no Free-States. Naples, after many Revolutions,
is under Spain, Rome under a Pope, and under him one Senator, in stead of those
many that were wont to be; Venice and Genoa have Senators and Dukes, but the
Dukes are of small power; Florence, Ferrara, Mantua, Parma, and Savoy, have no
Senators, but Dukes only, and they absolute; Burgundy, Lorain, Gascoin, and
Britany, had once Kings, then Dukes, but now are incorporated into France: so
all the Principalities of Germany that now are, were once imbodied in one
entire Regiment: Castile, Aragon, Portugal, and Barcelona, were once distinct
Kingdoms, but now united all to Spain, save Portugal, which fell off the other
day: France was first one Kingdom under Pharamond, afterward parted into four
Kingdoms, and at last become one again: England consisted of Free-States till
the Romans yoked it, afterward it was divided into seven Kingdoms, and in the
end it became one again. Thus you see how the world is subject to shiftings of
Government: and though it be most true, that the power of the Sword has been
most prevalent in many of these changes, yet some of them have been chiefly
managed (as they ought) by the peoples Consent; and even in those where the
Sword has made way, the peoples consent has ever been drawn and taken in
afterward, for corroboration of Title; it having been the custom of all
Usurpers, to make their investitures appear as just as they could, by getting
the Communities Consent ex post sacto, and entering into some compact with them,
for the better establishing themselves with a show of legality: which act of
all Tyrants and Usurpers, is a manifest (though tacit) confession of theirs,
That de jure the original of all Power and Government, is and ought to be in
the people.

Errors of Government; And Rules of Policy.
HAving proved that the Original of all just Power and Government is in the
People; and that the Government of the People, in a due and orderly succession
of their supreme Assemblies, is much more excellent than any other Form, I
suppose it falls in of course, in the next place, to note, and observe those
common Errors in Policy, wherein most Countties of the World, (especially that
part of it called Christendom) have been long entangled; that when the mystery
of Tyranny is undress't, and stripped of all its gaudy Robes, and gay
Appearances, it may be hiss't out of the Civil part of Mankind into the
company of the more barbarous and brutish Nations.

Israel being thus divided, and that it was done according to Rules and
Constitutions of Gods own appointment; it being Gods way then, when he was
pleased, to make choice of that people only, out of all the World, to be his
own peculiar, and so fixed his Church there in a National Form: Then it was
consined and restrained to that particular Nation, excluding all others. But if
any man will argue from hence, that it is lawful for any Nation now under the
Gospel to follow this pattern; then it behooves him, 1. to prove, that God
intended the Jewish Government as a pattern for us to follow under the Gospel.
And if any man will pretend to this, then in the second place, it will concern
him to prove, that we are to follow it in every particular, or only in some
particulars. That we are to follow it in every one, no sober man did ever yet
affirm: And if they will have us to follow it in some particulars,
relinquishing the ^est, then it concerns him to produce some Rule or Command
out of Scripture, plainly pointing out what parts of it we are to embrace, and
what not; or else he will never be able to make it appear, that the Form of the
Commonwealth of Israel was ever intended, either in the whole, or in part, as a
Pattern for Christians to follow under the Gospel. But never was any such Rule
alleged yet out of Scripture by those that pretend to a National Church.

And therefore, if we seriously reflect upon the Design of God, in sending
Christ into the World, we shall find it was to set an end to that Pompous
Administration of the Jewish Form; that as his Church and People were formerly
confined within the Narrow Pale of a particular Nation, so now the Pale should
be broken down, and all Nations taken into the Church: Not all Nations in a
lump; nor any whole Nations, or National Bodies to be formed into Churches; for
his Church or People, now under the Gospel, are not to be a Body Political, but
Spiritual, and Mystical: Not a promiscuous confusion of persons, taken in at
adventure; but an orderly collection, a picking and choosing of such as are
called and sanctified; and not a company of men forced in, by Commands and
Constitutions, of Worldly Powers and Prudence; but of such as are brought in by
the Power and Efficacy of Christ's Word and Spirit: for he himself has said, My
Kingdom is not of this World; it is not from hence, etc. And therefore, that
hand which hitherto has presumed, in most Nations, to erect a Power, called
Ecclesiastic, in equipage with the Civil, to bear ^way, and bind men's
Consciences to retain Notions, ordained for Orthodox, upon civil penalties,
under color of prudence, good order, discipline, preventing of Heresy,
advancing of Christ's Kingdom; and to this end; has twisted the Spiritual
Power (as they call it) with the Worldly and secular interest of State: This (I
say) has been the very right hand of Antichrist, opposing Christ in his way:
Whose Kingdom, Government, Governors, Officers, and Rulers; Laws, Ordinances,
and Statutes, being not of this World, (I mean, jure humano,) depend not upon
the helps and devices of Worldly wisdom.

Upon this score and pretense, the Infant Mystery of Iniquity began to work in
the very Cradle of Christianity.

Afterward it grew up by the indulgence of Constantine, and other Christian
Emperors, whom though God used in many good things for the suppression of
gross Heathen Idolatry, yet (by Gods permission) they were carried away, and
their eyes so far dazzled, through the glorious pretenses of the Prelates and
Bishops, that they could not see the old Serpent in a new Form wrapped up in a
Mystery; for, Satan had a new Game now to play, which he managed thus: First,
he led a great part of the World away with dangerous Errors, thereby to find
an occasion for the Prelates, to carry on the mystery of their Profession; and
so, under pretense of suppressing those dangerous errors they easily scrued
themselves into the Civil Power: and for continuing of it the surer in their
own hands, they made bold to baptize whole Nations with the name of Christian,
that they might (under the same pretense) gain a share of Power and Authority
with the Magistrate in every Nation; which they soon effected.

The Infant-being thus nursed, grew up in a short time to a perfect man, the man
of sin (if the Pope be the man, which is yet controverted by some:) for, the
Prelates having gotten the power in their hands, began then to quarrel, who
should be the greatest among them. At length, he of Rome bore away the Bell;
and so the next step was, that, from National Churches they proceed to (...) a
Mother Church of all Nations. A fair progress and pitch; indeed, from a small
beginning: and now being up, they defied all with Bell, Book, and Candle,
excommunicating and deposing Kings and Emperors, and binding men's Consciences
still, under the first specious pretense of suppressing Heresy, to believe
only in their Arbitrary Dictates, Traditions, and Errors, which are the
greatest Blasphemies, Errors, and Heresies, that ever were in the World. Now
they were up see what a do there was to get any part of them down again. What a
Quarter and Commotion there was in Germany, when Luther first brake the Ice?
And the like here in England, when our first Reformers began their Work: These
men, in part, did well, but having banished the Popes actual Tyranny, they left
the Seed, and Principle of it, still behind, which was, a State Ecclesiastical
united with the Civil; for, the Bishops twisted their own interest again with
that of the Crown, upon a Protestant Account; and by virtue of that, persecuted
those they called Puritans, for not being as Orthodox (they said) as themselves.

To conclude, if it be considered, that most of the Civil Wars, and Broiles,
throughout Europe, have been occasioned, by permitting the settlement of
Clergy-Interest, with the Secular, in National Forms, and Churches, it will
doubt else be understood, that the Division of a State into Ecclesiastical and
Civil, must needs be one of the main Errors in Christian Policy.



The Interest of absolute Monarchy, we conceive to be an unlimited,
uncontrolable, unaccountable station of Power and Authority in the hands of a
particular person, who governs only according to the Dictates of his own Will
and Pleasure. And though it has often bin disguised by Sophisters in Policy,
so as it has lost its own name, by shifting Forms; yet really, and
effectually, the thing in it self has bin discovered under the artificial
covers of every Form, in the various Revolutions of Government: So that nothing
more concerns a People established in a state of Freedom, than to be instructed
in things of this Nature, that the means of its preservation being understood,
and the subtle sleight of old Projectors brought into open view, they may
become the more zealous to promote the one, and prevent the other, if any old
game should happen to be played over anew, by any succeeding Generation.

It is very observable in Athens, that when they had laid aside their King, the
Kingly power was retained still in all the after-turns of Government: for their
Decimal Governors, and their Thirty (commonly called the Tyrants) were but a
multiplied Monarchy, the Monarchal Interest being held up as high as ever, in
keeping the exercise of the Supremacy out of the peoples hands, and seating
themselves in an unaccountable state of Power and Authority, which was somewhat
a worse condition, than the people were in before; for their Kings had
Supervisors, and there were also Senatick Assemblies, that did restrain and
correct them: but the new Governors having none, ran into all the heats and
fits, and wild extravagancies, of an unbounded Prerogative: by which means,
Necessity and Extremity opening the peoples Eyes, they, at length, saw all the
Inconveniences of Kingship wrapped up in new Forms, and rather increased, than
diminished; so that (as the only Remedy) they dislodged the Power out of those
hands, putting it into their own, and placing it in a constant orderly
Revolution of persons Elective by the Community. And now being at this fair
pass, one would have thought there was no shelter for a Monarchal Interest,
under a popular Form too. But alas, they found the contrary; for, the people
not keeping a strict Watch over themselves, according to the Rules of a Free
State; but being won by specious pretenses, and deluded by created Necessities,
to entrust the management of Affairs into some particular hands, such an
occasion was given thereby to those men to frame parties of their own, that by
this means, they in a short time became able to stand upon their own legs, and
do what they list without the peoples consent: and in the end, not only
discontinued, but utterly extirpated their successive Assemblies.

In Rome also, the Case was the same under every Alteration; and all
occasioned, by the crafty contrivances of Grandising Parties, and the peoples
own facility and negligence, in suffering themselves to be deluded: for, with
the Tarquin's, (as it is observed by Livy, and others) only the name King was
expelled, but not the thing; the Power and Interest of Kingship was still
retained in the Senate, and engrossed by the Consuls: For, besides the Rape of
Lucrece, among the other faults objected against Tarquin, this was most
considerable, That he had acted all things after his own head; and discontinued
Consultations with the Senate, which was the very height of Arbitrary Power.
But yet as soon as the Senate was in the saddle, they forgot what was charged
by themselves upon Tarquin, and ran into the same Error, by establishing an
Arbitrary, Hereditary, unaccountable Power in themselves, and their Posterity,
not admitting the people (whose interest and liberty they had pleaded, into any
share in Consultation, or Government, as they ought to have done, by a present
erecting of their successive Assemblies: so that you seethe same Kingly
Interest, which was in one before, resided then in the hands of many. Nor is it
my Observation only, but pointed out by Livy, in his second Book, as in many
other places; Cum a Patribus, non Consules, sed Carnifices, etc. When (says
he) the Senators strove to create, not Consuls, but Executioners, and
Tormentors, to vex and tear the people, etc. And in another place of the same
Book, Consules, immoderat a infinitaque potestate, omnes metus legum, etc. The
Consuls having an immoderate and unlimited Power, turned the terror of Laws and
punishments only upon the people, themselves (in the mean while) being
accountable to none but to themselves, and their Confederates in the Senate.

Then the Consular Government being cashiered, came on the Decemviri. Cum
Consulari Imperio ac Regio, sine provocatione, (says my Author) being invested
with a Consular and Kingly Power, without appeal to any other.

And in his third Book, he says, December Regum species erat, it was a Form of
ten Kings, the miseries of the people being increased ten times more then they
were under Kings, and Consuls: For remedy therefore, the ten were cashiered
also; and Consuls being restored, it was thought fit for the bridling of their
Power, to revive also the Dictatorship (which was a Temporary Kingship, used
only now and then upon occasion of Necessity) and also those Deputies of the
people called Tribunes, which one would have thought had bin sufficient Bars
against Monarchick Interest, especially being assisted by the peoples
successive Assemblies. But yet for all this, the people were cheated through
their own neglect, and bestowing too much confidence and trust upon such as
they thought their friends: For when they swerved from the Rules of a
Free State, by lengthning the Dictatorship in any hand, then
Monarchick-Interest stepped in there, as it did under Sylla, Caesar, and others,
long before it returned to a declared Monarchal Form; and when they lengthned
Commands in their Armies, then it crept in there; as it did under the
aforementioned persons, as well as Marius, Cinna, and others also; and even Pompey
himself, not forgetting also the pranks of the two Triumvirales, who all made a
shift: under every Form, being sometimes called Consuls, sometimes Dictators,
and sometimes Tribunes of the people, to out-act all the Flagitions Enormities
of an absolute Monarchy.

It is also evident in the Story of Florence, that that Commonwealth, even
when it seemed most free, could never quite shake off the Interest of Monarchy:
for, it was ever the business of one Upstart, or other; either in the Senate,
or among the People, to make way to their own ambitious Ends, and hoist
themselves into a Kingly posture through the Peoples favor, as we may see in
the Actions of Savanarola the Monk, Soderino, and the Medices, whose Family did
(as we see at this day) fix it self at length in the State of an absolute
Monarchy, under the Title of a Dukedom. Nor can it be forgotten, how much of
Monarchy (of late) crept into the United Provinces.

Now the use that is to be made of this Discourse, is this, that since it is
clear, the Interest of Monarchy may reside in a Consul; as well as in a King;
in a Dictator, as well as in a Consul; in the hands of many, as well as of a
single person; and that its Custom has bin to lurk under every Form, in the
various turns of Government, therefore as it concerns every people in a State
of Freedom to keep close to the Rules of a Free State, for the turning out of
Monarchy (whether simple, or compound, both name and thing, in one or many) by
which means only they will be enabled to avoid this second Error in Policy; so
they ought ever to have a Reverent and Noble respect of such Founders of
Free-States, and Commonwealths, as shall block up the way against Monarchick
Tyranny, by declaring for the Liberty of the People, as it consists in a due
and orderly succession of Authority, in their supreme Assemblies.

Free State, has bin a keeping of the people ignorant^ of those ways and means
that are essentially necessary* for the preservation of their Liberty; for,
implicit Faith, and blind Obedience, has hitherto passed current, and been
equally pressed and practiced by Grandees* both Spiritual and Temporal, upon
the People; so that they have in all Nations shared the Authority between them.
And though many quarrels have ^i^en in times past between Kings, and their
Clergy, touching their several Jurisdictions, yet the mysteries* of Domination
have been still kept under lock and key: so that their Prerogative remained
entire ever above the reach and knowledge of the People: by which means,
Monarchs and other standing Powers, have seen their own Interest provided for,
as well as in the Popes, in this mysterious* Maxim, Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion.

But these things ought not to be so, among a people that have declared
themselves a Free State: For, they should not only know what Freedom is, and
have it repre^ented in all its lively and lovely Features, that they may grow
zealous and jealous over it; but, that it may be a Zeal according to knowledge
and good purpose: it is without all question, most necessary, that they be made
acquainted, and thoroughly instructed in the Means and Rules of its
preservation, against the Adulterous Wiles and Rapes of any projecting
Sophisters that may arise hereafter.

And doubtless, this endeavor of mine, in laying down the Rules of preserving
a Free State, will appear so much the more necessary, if we consider, that all
the Inconveniences that in Times have happened under this Form, to imbroyl, or
ruin it, have proceeded (as we have formerly proved) either from the peoples
neglect, or rather ignorance of those Means and Rules that should be committed
unto them, both for Practice, and Observation: having therefore made brief
Collections out of the Monuments of this kind of Learning, I shall here insert
them, that the People of every Commonwealth, which mean to preserve their
Freedom, may be informed how to steer their course* according to such Rules as
have bin put in practice heretofore by, diverse Nations.



Thus Brutus* bound the Romans by an Oath against Kings, That they should never
suffer any man again to reign at Rome*

Thus the Hollanders preserved themselves also, entering into an Oath of
Abjuration* not only against King Philip^* and his Family, but all Kings for
ever.

And Brutus* to make sure work, did not only do this, but divided* the Royal
Revenues among the People; which was a good way to make them resolute to
Extremity, knowing, That if ever any King came in play again, He would take all
away again by virtue of his Prerogative and Crown: He brake also all the Images
and Statues of the T^rquint* and he levelled their houses with the ground, that
they might not remain as Temptations to any ambitious Spirits* Suitable to this
Policy, was that of Henry the 8th, who when he disposed of the Revenues of
Abbeys, demolished also the Building* osaying, Destroy the Nests, and the
Rocks will never return again. Which* questionless, was a most sure way, both
in him, and Brutus, to be imitated, or neglected* as there may be occasion. But
they thought, in a ease of this Nature, that the convenience in keeping them,
could not counter^ail the danger.

Romans, was called, affectatio Regnt, an aspiring to Kingship: Which being
observed in M^lius and Manlius, two noble Romans, that had deserved highly of
the State, yet their past-merits and services, could not exempt them from the
just anger of the People, who made them Examples to Posterity: Yea, the Name of
the latter, (though Livy calls him an incomparable man, had he not lived in a
Free State,) was ever after disowned by his whole Family, that famous Family of
the Manlii; and both the Name and Memory of Him, and of his Consulship, was
rased out of all public Records, by Decree of the Senate.

The not keeping close to this Rule, had of late like to have cost the
Lowcountries, the loss of their Liberty; for the Wealth of the House of Orange,
grown up to excess, and permitting the last man to match into a Kingly Family,
put other thoughts and designs into his head, than beseemed a member of a
Free State; which had he not been prevented, by the Providence of God* and a
dark night, might in all probability, have reduced them under the Yoke* of
Kingly Power.

non Diurnare Imperia, not to permit a Continuation of Command and Authority,
in the hands of particular persons, or families. This point we have been very
large in: The Romans had a notable care herein, till they grew corrupt. Livy,
in his fourth Book, says, Libertatis magna custod^a est, ^si magna Imperia
esse non sinas, and temporis modus imponatu^: It is a grand preservative of
Liberty, if you do not permit great Powers and Commands to continue long* and
if so be you limit, in point of time. To this purpose, they had a Law, called,
the Emilian Law, to restrain them; as we find in the Ninth Book, where he
brings in a Noble Roman, saying thus: Hoc quidem Regno simile est; And this,
indeed, is like a Kingship* That I alone should bear this great Office of the
Censorship, Triennium and sex menses, three years and six months, contrary to
the Emiliam Law. In his third Book also, he speaks of it, as of a monstrous
business, That the Ides of May were come (which was the time of their years
choice) and yet no new Election appointed: Id-vero Regnum haud dubie videre,
deploratur in perspetuum libertas. It with doubt seems no other than a Kingdom,
and Liberty is utterly lost for ever. It was Treason for any man to hold that
high Office of the Dictatorship in his own hand, beyond six months. He that
would see notable stuff to this purpose, let him read Ciceroes Epistles to
Atticus, concerning Caesar. The care of that people* in this particular,
appeared also, that they would not permit any man to bear the same Office twice
together.

This was observed likewise (as Aristotle tells us) in all the Free-States of
Greece.

And in Rome we find Cincinnatus, one of the brave Roman Generals, making a
Speech unto the People, to persuade them, to let him lay down his Command. Now
the time was come, though the Enemy was almost at their Gates, and never more
need, than at that time, of his valor and prudence, as the people told him:
but no persuasion would serve the turn; resign he would, telling them, There
would be more danger to the State, in prolonging his Power, than from the
Enemy, since it might prove a President most pernicious to the Roman Freedom.
Such another Speech was made by M. Rutilius Censorinus, to the People, when
they forced him to undergo the Office of Censor twice together, contrary to the
intent and practice of their Ancestors; yet he accepted it: but (as Plutarch
tell us) upon this condition; That a Law might pass against the Title in that,
and other Officers, least it should be drawn into President in time to come.
Thus the People dealt also with their own Tribunes, the Law being, That none of
them should be continued two years together. So tender were the Romans, in this
particular, as one principal Rule and Means, for the preservation of their
Liberty.

this grand inconvenience in State, the Affairs of the Commonwealth will be
made subservient to the ends of a few persons; no Corn shall be measured. but
in their bushel; nor any Materials be allowed for the Public Work, unless they
square well with the building of a private Interest, or Family. This therefore,
was a principal point of State among the Romans, Ne duo vel plures ex una
familia magnos Magistratus gerant eodem tempore; Let not two* or more* of one
Family, bear great Offices at the same time. And a little after it follows, Ne
magna Imperia ab una familia praescribantur, Let not great Commands be
prescribed, or continued, by one Family.

That little liberty which was left to the Romans, after that fatal stab given
to Caesar in the Senate House, might have been preserved, had they prevented
his Kinsman Octavius from succeeding him in the possession of an extraordinary
Power. The effecting whereof was Ciceroes work, and, indeed, his principal
error: as he often afterward acknowledged; which may serve to show, That the
wisest man may be sometimes mistaken: For he brought the other into play;
whertas had he quitted his spleen, and consulted his brain, he must
questionless have seen, that a siding with Anthony had been more convenient,
then with the other; who being once admitted into Power, soon drew the Parties,
and Interests of his Uncle Julius, to become his own; and with a wet finger,
not only cast off his friend Cicero, but contrived the ruin of the Republic,
and Him, both together.

The Florentine Family of the Medices, who hold an absolute Command at this
day, made themselves, by continuing Power in their hands, in a short time so
considerable, that they durst openly bid defiance to Public Liberty, which
might have continued much longer, had not Casinus been so easily admitted to
succeed his Cousin Alexander.

It is observable also, of the same Family, that one of them being Pope, they
then hatched Designs upon several parts of Italy, not doubting but to carry
them by favor of the Pope their Kinsman: but he dying before their Ends were
effected, they then made a Party in the Conclave, for the creating of Julian de
Medicis, who was Brother to the former Pope, and had like to have carried it,
till Pompeius Columba stood up, and showed them how dangerous and prejudicial
it must of necessity prove, to the Liberties of Italy* that the Popedom should
be continued in one house, in the hands of two brothers one after another.

What Effects the continuation of Power, in the Family of Orange, has had in
the United Provinces, is every man's observation; and that Nation sufficiently
felt, long before the Project came to maturity, in this last man's days; and
had he left a son of sufficient years behind him, to have slept immediately into
his place, perhaps the Design might have gone on: but certainly that People
have wisely improved their opportunity, (the Cockatrice being not flech'd) in
reducing that Family into a temper more suitable to a State and Interest of
Liberty.

What made the ancient Roman Senate, in a short time, so intolerable to that
People, but because they carried all by Families; as the Senate of Venice does
now at this day: where, if the Constitution were otherwise, the people would
then (perhaps) be much more sensible what it is to be in a State of Freedom.

Free-States, to hold up the Majesty and Authority of their Suffrages, or Votes
entire* in their Senators, or supreme Assemblies: for if this were not looked
to, and secured from control, or influence of any other Power, then Actum erat
de liberate, Liberty and Authority became lost for ever. So long as the Roman
people kept up their credit and Authority, as sacred, in their Tribunes, and
Supreme Assemblies, so long they continued really free: but when by their own
neglect, they gave Sylla, and his Party, in the Senate, an opportunity of power
to curb them, then their Suffrages (once esteemed as sacred) were trodden under
foot; for immediately after, they came to debate and act but by courtesy, the
Authority left being by Sylla, after the expiration of his Dictatorship, in the
hands of the standing Senate, so that it could never after be regained by the
People, Nor did the Senate themselves keep it long in their own hands: for when
Caesar marched to Rome, he deprived them also of the Authority of their
Suffrages; only in a formal way made use of them, and so under a shadow of
legality, he assumed that power unto himself, which they durst not deny him.

Just in the same manner dealt Cosmus with the Flerentine Senate: he made use
of their Suffrages, but he had so played his Cards beforehand, that they durst
not but yield to his Ambition. So also Tiberius, when he endeavored to settle
himself, first brought the Suffrages of the Senate at his own Devotion, that
they durst not but consent to his Establishment; and then so ordered the
matter, that he might seem to do nothing, not only without their consent; but
to be forced to accept the Empire by their entreaty: so that you see, there was
an Empire, in Effect, long before it was declared in Formality.

From hence, therefore, we may clearly deduce the necessity of this Rule in a
Free State, from the practice of times past, that no State can preferits
Freedom, but by maintaining the free Suffrage of the People in full vigor,
untainted with the influence, or mixture, of any Commanding Power.

Militia lodged only in the Peoples hands; or that part of them, which are
most firm to the Interest o^ Liberty, that so the Power may rest fully in the
Disposition of their Supreme Assemblies. The happy conscquence whereof, was
ever to this purpose:

That nothing could at any time be imposed upon the people, but by their
consent; that is, by the consent of themselves; or of such as were by them
entrusted: this was a Rule most strictly practiced in all the Free-States of
Greece: For, as Aristotle tells us, in his fourth Book of Politics, they ever
had special care to place the Use and Exercise of Arms in the people: because
(say they) the Commonwealth is theirs who held the Arms.

The Sword, and Sovereignty, ever walk hand in hand together. The Romans were
very curious in this particular, after they had gained a plenary possession of
Liberty in their Tribunes, and successive Assemblies, Rome it self, and the
Territories about it, was trained up perpetually in Arms, and the whole
Commonweal, by this means became one formal Militia, a general Exercise of
the best part of the people in the use of Arms, was the only Bulwark of their
Liberty: This was reckoned the surest way to preserve it both at home, and
abroad: the Majesty of the People being secured thereby, as well against
Domestic Affronts from any of their own Citizens, as against the foreign
Invasions of bad Neighbors.

Their Arms were never lodged in the hands of any, but such as had an Interest
in the Public; such as were acted by that Interest not drawn only by Pay; such
as thought themselves well paid, in repelling Invaders that they might with
Freedom return to their Affairs: For, the truth is, so long as Rome acted by
the pure Principles of a Free State, it used no Arms to defend itself, but,
such as we call, sufficient men; such, as for the most part were men of Estate,
Masters of Families, that took Arms (only upon occasion) pro Aris and Focis,
for their Wives, their Children, and their Country. In those days there was no
difference, in order, between the Citizen, the Husbandman, and the Soldier:
for, he that was a Citizen, or Villager yesterday, became a Soldier the next,
if the Public Liberty required it; and that being secured, by repelling of
Invaders, both Foreign and Domestic, immediately the Soldier became Citizen
again: so that the first and best brave Roman Generals, and Soldiers, came
from the Plough, and returned thither when the Work was over.

This was the usual course even before they had gained their Tribunes and
Assemblies; that is, in the Infancy of the Senate, immediately after the
Expulsion of their Kings: for, then even in the Senatick Assembly, there were
some Sparks of Liberty in being, and they took this course to maintain it.

The Tarquins being driven out, but having a Party left still within, that
attempted to make several Invasions, with confidence to carry all before them:
and yet in the Intervalls, we find not any form of soldiery; only the Militia
was lodged and exercised in the hands of that Party, which was firm to the
Interest of Freedom, who upon all occasions, drew forth at a Nod of the Senate,
with little charge to the Public, and so rescued themselves out of the Claws
of Kingly Tyranny.

Nor do we find in after*times, that they p^rmitted a Deposition, of the Arms
of the Commonwealth in any other way, till that their Empire increasing
necessity constrained them to erect a continued stipendary Soldiery (abroad in
foreign parts) either for the holding, or winning of Provinces. Then Luxury
increasing with Dominion, the strict Rule and Discipline of Freedom was soon
quitted* Forces were kept up at home, (but what the consequences were, stories
will tell you) as well as in the Provinces abroad.

The Ambition of Cinna, the horid Tyranny of Sylla, the insolence of Marius,
and the self ends of diverse other Leaders, both before, and after them, filled
all Italy with Tragdeies, and the World with wonder: so that in the end, the
People seeing what misery they had brought on themselves, by keeping their
Armies within the bowels of Italy, passed a Law to prevent it, and to employ
them abroad, or at a convenient distance: the Law was, That if any General
marched over the River of Rubicon, he should be declared a public Enemy.

And in the passage of that River, this following Inscription was erected, to
put the men of Arms in mind of their duty: Imperator, sive miles, sive Tyrannus
armatus quisquis, sistito vexillum armaque deponito, nec citra hunc Amnem
trajicitio: General, or Soldier, or Tyrant in Arms, whosoever thou be, stand,
quit thy Standard, and lay aside thy Arms, or else cross not this River.

For this cause it was, that when Caesar had presumed once to march over this
River, he conceived himself so far engaged, that there was no Retreat; no Game
next, but have at all, advances to Rome it self, into a possession of the
Empire.

By this means it was, the Commonwealth having lost its Arms, lost it self too,
the Power being reduced both effectually and formally into the hands of a
single Person, and his Dependants, who, ever after, kept the Arms out of the
hands of the People.

Then followed the erecting of a Praetorian Band, instead of a Public Militia,
he being followed here in by Augustus, and the rest of his Successors, imitated
of latter-times by the Grand Seignor; by Cosmus the first great Duke of
Tuscany; by the Muscovi^e, the Russian, the Tartar, and the French, who by that
means are all Absolute; and it was strongly endeavored here too in England by
the late King, who first attempted it by a Design of introducing Foreigners,
viz. the German Horse* and afterward by corrupting of the Natives; as when he
labored the Army in the North, in their return to rifle the Parliament,
neglected Train-Bands; and at length, flew out himself into open Arms against
the Nation.

So that you see, the way of Freedom has bin to lodge the Arms of a
Common-Weal^, in the hands of that part of the People, which are firm to its
Establishment.

educated and instructed in the Principles of Freedom* Aristotle speaks plainly
to this purpose, saying; That the institution of Youth, should be accommodated
to that Form of Government, under which they live, forasmuch, as it makes
exceedingly for preservation of the present Government, whatsoever it be. The
Reason of it appe^^s in this; because all the Tinctures and Impression that men
receive in their Youth, they retain in the full Age, though never so bad,
unless they happen (which is very rare) to quell the corrupt Principles of
Education by an Excellency of Reason, and sound Judgment.

And for confirmation of this, we might cite the various Testimonies of
Plutarch, Isocrates, with many more, both Philosophers, Orators, and others,
that have treated of this particular, touching the Education of Children, as it
relates either to Domestic, or Civil Government: But we shall take it for
granted, without more ado, supposing none will deny, of what effect it is, in
all the Concernments of Mankind, either in Conversation, or in Action.

The necessity of this Point, appears from hence, as well as the Reason; That
if care be nor taken to temper the Youth of a Commonwealth, with Princip^es
and Humors suitable to that Form, no sure settlement or peace, can ever be
expected: for Schools, Academies with al^ other Seed-plots, and Seminaries of
Youth, will otherwise be but so many Nurseries of Rebellion, public Enemies,
and unnatural Monsters that will tear the bowels of their Mother-Countrey: And
this Neglect, if it follow an alteration of Government, after a Civil War, is
so much the more dangerous; because, as long as Youngsters are nuzled up in the
old Ways and Rudiments, by the old ill-affected Paedagogues, there will ever be
a hankering after the Old Government, which must ever be in a fair probability
of return, when new Generations shall be catechized into old Tenets and
Affections, contrary to the Establishment of a Free State: That being taken for
the declared Interest of this Nation. Therefore, the consequence of such
Neglect is clearly this* That the Enmity will be immortal, a Sett^ement
impossible: there must be a perpetual Disposition to Civil-War, in stead of
Civil Society.

Upon this account it was, that in Plutarch and Isocrates, we find so many good
Testimonies of the great care that was had amongst all the Free-States of
Greece in this particular, which tied up their Paedagogues and Teachers, to
certain Rules; and selected certain Authors to be read only, as Classical, for
the Institution of their Youth: And, that it was so in the days of Julius
Caesar, even in that barbarous Country of Gallia, appears by Caesar's own
Commentaries, who tells, how that it was the main Office of those famous men
amongst them called Druides, to breed up their Youth not only in Religion, but
also to instruct them in the Nature of a Commonwealth, and mould them with
Principles, answerable to the Government.

If we reflect upon the two Grand Turns of State in Rome, the first, from a
Monarchy to a Free State; and then from a Free State to a Monarchy again, they
minister matter of notable Observation in this particular.

In the first, we find how difficult it was for the Romans to preserve their
Freedom when they had gotten it, because most of the Youth had bin educated in
Monarchical Principles, and such Tutors were ever inclining that way upon the
least opportunity: so that the sons even of Brutus himself, (who was the
Founder of their Liberty) quitted that natural affection which they owed unto
their Father, and Councrey; and being swayed by the Monarchick Principles of
corrupt Education, drew in a great part of the Roman Youth, (like themselves,)
to join with them in a Design for the bringing back of the Tarquins to the
Kingdom.

It is very observable also, what a do that Commonwealth had to settle, so
long as any of the old stock of Education were living, because those corrupt
points of Discipline and Government, wherewith they were seasoned when young,
could not be worn out with Age; but hurried many of them along with the storm
of every Insurrection and Invasion of the public Enemy.

On the other side, in the Turn of a Free State, to a Monarchy again, we see
with what difficulty Caesar met, in settling his own Domination over a People
that had been educated in a Free State, and in Principles of Freedom: insomuch,
that in the end it cost him his life being stabbed for his Usurpation by a
combination of some of the Senators, and the Fact applauded not only by the
People, but by Cicero, and all the Roman Writers, and others that had been bred
up under the Form of Freedom.

And afterward, when Augustus took upon him the Inheritance and Title of his
Uncle Caesar, he did it, lentopede, very slowly and warily, for fear of
conjuring up the same spirit in the people, that had flown into revenge against
his Uncle, for his Rape upon their Liberty.

And it is Noted by Tacitus, that among the other advantages that Augustus had
for his Establishment, there was this: That he never declared himself, till,
after many delays and shifts, for the continuation of Power in his own hands,
he got insensibly into the Throne, when the old men were most of them dead, and
the young Generation grown up, having been pretty well educated and inured to
his Lordly Domination. The words of Tacitus are these: All (says he) was quiet
in the City, the old names of the Magistrates remained unchanged; the young men
were all born after Augustus his Victory at Actium: and the greatest part of
the old men, during the Civil Wars; when the Free State was imbroiled and
usurpt (in effect, though retained still in name by powerful and ambitious
persons) so that when he assumed and owned the Empire, there was not one man
Living, that had so much as seen the ancient Form of Government of a
Free State; which indeed facilitated his Design very much, the Generation then
Living, being by his Artifice and Power, bred up to his own Monarchy-Interest
and Devotion.

We might be larger, but this is enough, to show of what consequence the
careful Education of Youth, is, in the Constitution of Government: and
therefore, without doubt, it is one essential point to be observed in the
Establishment of a Free State, that all ways and means be used for their
seasoning and instruction in the principles of Freedom.

especially relates unto the People themselves in point of behavior, viz. That
being once possessed of Liberty; they ought to use it with moderation, lest it
turn to licentiousness; which, as it is a Tyranny it self, so in the end it
usually occasions the corruption and conversion of a Free State, into
Monarchical Tyranny: And therefore (by way of prevention) it is necessary to
set down a few Cautions.



And therefore, seeing that Enormity of Tumult, Dissension, and Sedition, is
the main that has bin objected by Tyrants, and their Creatures, against the
Peoples Government, the only Expedient to confute it is, That those People,
that are, or shall be settled, in a State of Freedom, do (upon all occasions)
give them the Lie, by a diser^e^ and moderate behavior in all their
proceedings, and a due reverence of such as they have once elected, and made
their Superiors.

And as this is most requisite on the one side; so on the other side, if there
be just (but they must be sure it be just) cause to use sharp and quick
Remedies, for the Cure of a Commonwealth, then (seeing all Majesty and
Authority is really and fundamentally in the people, and but Ministerially in
their Trustees, or Representatives) it concerns the people by all means to see
to the Cure.

And that is in a word, in such cases only, as appear to be manifest
intrenchments (either in design, or in being) by men of Power, upon the
Fundamentals, or Essentials, of their Liberty, without which, Liberty cannot
consist.

What those Essentials are, may be collected out of the past-discourse; the
sense of all shall be illustrated by one instance.

It is that famous Contention which lasted for three hundred years in Rome
betwixt the Senate and the People, about the dividing of such Lands as were
conquered and taken from the Enemy.

The Senators; they sharing the lands amongst themselves, allowed little, or
none, unto the people; which gave such Discontents, that the people made a Law
to curb them; enacting, That no Senator should possess above 500 Acres of Land.

The Senators cried, it was against their Liberty, thus to be abridged by the
people: And the people cried, it was inconsistent with Liberty, that the
Senators should thus greaten themselves by an ingrosment of wealth and power
into their own hands. Livy says, The people in this, said right, and the
Senators did wrong: but that they both did ill, in making it a ground of Civil
Dissension; for, in process of time, when the Gracchi, who were supposed great
Patrons of Liberty, took upon them to side with the people, they did, instead
of finding out some moderate ways and Expedients to reduce the Senators to
Reason, proceed with such heat and violence, that the Senate being jealous of
their own safety, were forced to choose Sylla for their General: which being
observed by the people, they also raised an Army, and made Marius their
General: so that here you see in came to a downright Civil-War.

The occasion indeed, was given by the Senators; (for, there was no reason they
should Grandise themselves in so gross a manner as they did) but yet the
occasion ought not to have bin so taken, and prosecuted with such violence as
it was by the People: for seeing more temperate-wayes had been practiced by
their Ancestors, and might have been found out again, to curb the Ambition of
their Nobility in the Senate: Therefore, the People ought, first, to have tried
those ways again, and have used all other means to have brought things about,
rather than by a milguided heat and violence to rush into Arms; which as it is
the most desperate Remedy, so it ought never to be used, but when all other
courses have been tried in vain, and when the Public Liberty is really
concerned by an imminent Danger, or invincible Necessity: For, this Quarrel,
which questionless might have been composed was, through indiscretion, made the
ground of so bloody a Civil-war, that what through Fines, Banishment, inhumane
Cruelties, acted on both sides, Defeats in the open Field, and Massacres within
the City, it cost the best Blood and Estates of the Nobility and Commons; and
in the end, it cost them also their Liberty.

Pompey and Caesar, and which will serve to illustrate the other part of our
discourse, in showing, When it is that the people may make use of the utmost,
remedy; that is, in case of an intrenchment, manifestly designed, and acted
upon the Public Liberty. For Caesar having given manifest causeso Suspicion to
the Senate and people, by his acting amongst his Soldiers; and then by a
downright march with them over Rubicon toward Rome, (which was treason by the
Law) this was a plain usurpation, and drew an invincible necessity, upon the
people, and Senate, to arm form their Liberty and commence a Civil war under
the conduct of Pompey; so that this last war was necessary as the other was
needless, if they could have kept within the bounds of prudence, and
moderation.

We have a very notable instance also in our own Nation, which may serve for a
Just example to all the world in point of behavior. If we run over the
Catalogue of the late Kings defaults in government, we find extraordinary
patience in the people, notwithstanding his extraordinary encroachments from
time to time. It were needless to reckon up the several Monopolies,
Impositions, and other oppressions of the People, both in soul and body, which
are made public and known to all the World; together with that highest of all
Practices, not only in dissolving Parliaments abruptly, but professedly
designing the ruin of Parliaments, in depriving the People of their due
Succession. Yet notwithstanding all this, that desperate Remedy of the Sword
was forborne, until invincible Necessity did put it into their hands, for the
preservation of themselves, with their Rights and Liberties.

And so by these Examples, any people in a State of Freedom, may be
sufficiently instructed how to demean themselves, for the avoiding of
Licentiousness, Tumult, and Civil Dissension, which are the principal
Inconveniences charged by Royalists, upon Free-States and Commonwealths: from
hence, also, may be observed all the necessary points of prudence, and
forbearance, which ought to take place in respect of Superiors, till it shall
evidently appear unto a people, that there is a Design on foot to surprise and
seize their Liberties.

A second Caution, is, in relation to their Elective Power, that in all
Elections of Magistrates, they have an especial Eye upon the Public, in
making choice of such persons only, as have appeared most eminent, and active,
in the Establishment and Love of Freedom.

In such hands the Guardianship of Liberty may be safely placed, because such
men have made the Public Interest, and their own, all one; and therefore will
neither betray, nor desert it, in prosperity or adversity; whereas men of
another qualification and temper, if they get into Authority, care not to serve
the Public any further, than the public serves them, and will draw off and on
as they find their Opportunity: Yea, and take this for a certain Rule, that if
any person be admitted into Power, that loves not the Commonwealth, above all
other considerations, such a man is (as we say) every man's money; any
State-Marchant may have him for a Factor: and for good consideration, he will
often make Returns upon the Public Interest, have a stock going in every
Party, and with men of every Opinion, and (if occasion serve) truck with the
Common-Enemy, and Commonwealth, both together.

But that you may see, I do not speak without book, it is Aristotle's opinion,
as well as mine; who says, in the first of his Politics, being thus
translated, Per negligentiam mutatu^ status Reipublicae, cum ad Potestates
assumuntur illi qu^ praesentem statum non amant: The Form of a Commonwealth is
then altered by negligence, when those men are taken into Power, which do not
love the present Establishment, it is not only a way to preserve a
Commonwealth, to avoid those that hate it, but those also are as much to be
avoided, that do not love it; that is, who are not earnestly wedded to it by an
inward active principle of Affection: And the reason is very evident, because
their Affections being of an indifferent Nature, remain ready to run out into
any Form, Interest, or Party, that offers it self upon the least alteration or
temptation whatsoever. For this, we might give you instance enough, and too
much; but waving them, it may suffice, that most of the Broils, Tumults, and
Civil Dissentions, that ever happened in Free-States, have been occasioned by the
Ambitious, Treacherous, and Indirect Practices of such persons admitted into
Power, as have not been firm in their hearts to the Interest of Liberty.

The truth of this is (omitting many others) to be seen in the Roman State,
after its Liberty was fully settled in a Succession of the Peoples supreme
Assemblies.

For the Nobility in the Senate, being men of another Interest (however they
pretended) and, sometimes by cunning, sometimes by corrupting, getting Trust
from the People, did by combination and compliance with their Fellow-Senators,
to garble, perplex, and turmoil the Peoples Affairs, Concernments, and
Understandings, that at length, what they could never have done by force, as
Opposites, they effected by fraud, as Friends, to deprive the People of a quiet
and comfortable enjoyment of their Freedom.



The former course has ever bin the occasion of discontents, sidings, and
Parties.

The latter, stops the mouths of men, that perhaps are contrary minded, and
draws the consent and approbation of all the World, when they see men put in
Authority, that have a clear reputation of transcendent Honesty and Wisdom.



The Banishment, called Ostraoism, among the Athenians, was instituted (at
first) upon a just and noble ground: so was that called Petatism, among the
Lacedaemonians, to turn such out of the Commonwealth, who had rendered
themselves suspected against the common Liberty: but yet the abuse of it
afterward proved most pernicious, to the imbroyling of those States with Civil
Dissension, whenit was perverted by some petulant spirits, to an opposition of
some few (and but few) of their best deserving Citizens.

The Romans also, in their state of Liberty, retained this freedom also, of
keeping all persons accountable, and accusing whom they pleased, but then they
were very cautious also, to retain that Decree of the Senate, called,
Turpilianum, in full forde and virtue, whereby a severe-Fine was set on the
Heads of all Calumniators, and false Accusers.

The due Observation of this Rule preserved that State a long time from
Usurpation by men in power on the one side, and from popular clamor and
Tumults on the other side.



The Reason is, because, (as the Proverb says) Honores mutant mores, Honors
change men's manners; Accessions, and Continuations of Power and Greatness,
expose the mind to temptations: They are Sails too big for any Bulk of
Mortality to steer an even course course by.

The Kingdoms of the World, and the Glories of them, are Baits that seldom
fails when the Tempter goes a fishing: and none but he, that was more than
man, could have refused them. How many Free-States and Commonwealths have paid
dear for their Experience in this particular? who by trusting their own
servants too far, have been forced, in the end to receive them for their
Masters. Nor is it to be wondered at by any, considering that immoderate Power
soon lets in high and ambitious thoughts; and where they are once admitted, no
Design so absurd, or contrary to a man's principles, but he rusheth into it,
without the least remorse or consideration: for the Spirit of Ambition, is a
Spirit of Giddiness, ir foxes men that receive it, and makes them more drunk
than the spirit of Wine.

So that were they never so wise, just, and honest before, they afterward
become the contrary, mere sots, non compos mentis, being hurried on without
fear or wit, in all their undertakings, And therefore, without question, it
highly concerns a People that have redeemed and rescued their Liberties out of
the hands of Tyranny, and are declared a Free State, so to regulate their
Affairs, that all Temptations, and Opportunities of Ambition, may be removed
out of the way: or else there follows a necessity of Tumult and Civil
Dissension, the common consequence whereof has ever been a Ruin of the
public Freedom.

This Caesar, who first took Arms upon the Public Score, and became the
Peoples Leader, letting in Ambitious Thoughts to his unbounded Power, soon
shook hands with his first Friends and Principles, and became another man: so
that upon the first fair Opportuniry, he turned his Arms on the Public
Liberty.

Thus did Sylla serve the Senate, and Marius also the People, being the same
Tyrant, in effect, though not in name, nor in an open manner.

Thus did Pisistratus at Athens, Agathocles in Sicily, Cosmos, Soderino, and
Savaranola in Florence, Castrucio in Luca, and others, in many other places:
Nor must it be forgotten what the Family of Orange would have done in Holland;
for upon the very same account have Usurpations bin commenced in all
Free-States throughout the World.

Public Freedom, is this, That it be made an unpardonable Crime, to incur the
guilt of Treason against the Interestand Majesty of the People.

And for the clearing of this, it will be requisite to muster up those various
Particulars that come within the compass of Treason, according to the Practice,
and Opinion of other Nations. The 1. remarkable Treason in old Rome, after its
Establishment in a State of Freedom, was that of Brutus his sons, who entered
into a formal Conspiracy for the bringing back of the Tarquins to the Kingdom
by force of Arms.

This Brutus was the Founder of the Roman Liberty; and therefore one would have
thought the young men might have obtained an easy pardon: But such was the
zeal of the Romans, for the preservation of their Freedom, that they were all
put to death without mercy; and, that all others in time to come, might be
deprived of the least hope of being spared upon the like occasion, their own
Father was the man most forward to bring them to Execution.

This was Treason in gross: but in after-time, there started up more refined
pieces of Treason; as may be collected out of the Actions of Maelius and
Manlius, two persons that had deserved highly of the Common wealth; but
especially the latter, who saved it from ruin, when the Gauls had besieged the
Capitol.

Nevertheless, presuming afterward upon the People, because of his
extraordinary Merits, He, by greating himself beyond the size of a good
Citizen; and entertaining Thoughts and Counsels of surprising the Peoples
Liberties, was condemned to death; but yet not without the Peoples pity (as
indeed it was an unhappy Necessity, that they should be forced to destroy him
that had saved them from destruction) To the same end came Maelius also, upon
the like occasion.

Another sort of Treason there was contrived likewise against that People;

And that was by those Magistrates, called the Decemviri, touching whose
Actions, and the Ground of their Condemnation, I only let you know,

That you may be sufficiently informed by other Pens then mine; such as the
Historian Livy, Pomponius, Dionysius, and others, that have written of the
Roman Affairs and Antiquities.

A fourth sort of Treason against that People, was manifest Usurpation, acted
over and over, long before the time of Caesar.

Some other Particulars also, there were, of less consideration, that came
within the compass of Treason; And in all, they were very strict to vindicate
the Interest of the Commonwealth, without respect of Persons.

To those passages out of the old Commonwealth of Rome, let us add the rest we
have to say about this point, out of the practices of the present State of
Venice, the most exact for Punctillo's of that Nature that ever was in the
World; and therefore, questionless, it is the most principal cause of her so
long continuance: It is, there, Death without mercy, for any man to have the
least attempt, or thought, of conspiring against the Commonweal, and in
several other Cases, as follows.

Secondly, it is Treason in case any Senator betray Counsels: there it is an
unpardonable Crime, and such a mortal sin, that draws on Death without mercy.

This severity also, was retained in the Roman State, where such as became
guilty of this Crime, were either burnt alive, or hanged upon a Gibber:
Hereupon, (says Valerius Max. lib. 2.) when any matter was delivered, or
debated, it was, as if no man had heard a syllable of what had been said among
so many: From whence it came to pass, that the Decrees of their Senate were
called Tacita, that is to say; things concealed; because never discovered,
until they came to Execution.

Thirdly, it is Treason, without mercy, for any Senators, or other Officers of
Venice, to receive Gifts, or Pensions, from any foreign Prince, or State, upon
any pretense whatsoever. It was an old Proverb among the Heathens, That the
gods themselves might be taken with gifts: and therefore the consequences must
needs be dangerous, in the inferior Courts of States and Princes; since
nothing can be carried in this Case, according to Native Interest, and Sound
Reason; but only by Pluralities of Foreign Dictates, and Compliances: But in
Venice they are so free from this treacherous Impiety, that all States which
transact with them, must do it above-board, consult beforehand with their
brains, and not their purses: so that (as Thuanus says) the King of France
needs not use much labor to purchase an Interest with any Prince, or State in
Italy, unless it be the Venetian Republic, where all Foreign Compliances, and
Pensioners, are punished with utmost severity; but escape well enough, in other
places.

Fourthly, It is Treason for any of her Senators to have any private Conference
with Foreign Ambassadors and Agents. It is very observable also, among our
Neighbors of the Low Countries, that one Article of the Charge, whereby they
took off Barnevelts head, was, for that he held familiarity and converse with
the Spanish Ambassador, at the same time when Spain was an Enemy.

Thus you have a brief Description of Treason, in the most notable kinds of it,
according to the Customs and Opinions of two of the most eminent Free-States,
(which may serve instead of all the rest) that has been in the World; who, as
a principal Rule and Means for the preservation of Freedom, made it a Crime
unpardonable, to incur the guilt of Treason, in any of these kinds, against the
Interest and Majesty of the People in a Free State,

We now return to the former main Point of this Discourse, in tracing out the
Remainders of those Errors that have been received in the Practice of Policy.



A more lively description of this strange Pocus called Reason of State, take
as follows. It is the most sovereign Commudaer, and the most important
Counselor. Reason of State is the Care and compass of the ship, the life of a
State. That which answers all objections, and quarrels, about Mall government.
That Is it, which makes War, imposes Taxes, cuts off Offenders, pardons
Offenders, sends and treats Ambassadors.

It can say and unsay, do and undo, baulk the Common Road, make Highways to
become By-ways, and the furthest about, to become the nearest Cut. If a
difficult Knot come to be untied, which neither the Divine by Scripture, nor
Lawyer by Case or precedent can untie, then Reason of State, or a hundred ways
more, which Idiots knows not, dissolves it. This is that great Empress which
the Italians call Raggione distat^. It can rant as a Soldier, complement as a
Monfieur, trick it as a Juggler, strut it as a States man and is as changable
as the Moon, in the variety of her appearances.

But we may take notice of a more excellent way in oppsition to this sandy
Foundation of Policy, called Reason of State, viz. a simple reliance upon God
in the vigorous and present actings of all Righteousness, expressed by honest
men, in plain language, to this effect; Fiat justitia, and fractus illabatur
Orbis; Deal uprightly, walk close and real to your promises, and principles,
though the Fabric of Heaven and earth should fall, yet God is able to support,
he expects but so much faith as will counterpoise a grain of mustard seed.
Besides, in following singly, a just and righteous principle, a man gains this
advantage, that we may go on boldly, with a mind free from that torturing
solicitude of success, (he is subject to none of those heats and colds, those
fits and frights, wherewith men are perpetually vexed, for fear of discovery or
miscarriage, when they have once entangled themselves in any by-acting of
Engagements) he either prospers, to the great good of his Nation, or else dies
with honor and triumph.

But those that follow the other principle of Humane Invention, and serve that
Italian Goddess, Raggione di Stato, they may live a while as gods, but shall
die like men, and perish like one of the Princes.

But because words will not serve the turn, take a few Examples of those many,
that might be fetched from all Ages, and Nations. It was Reason of State, made
Pharaoh hold the Israelites in bondage, and afterward, when they were freed,
to endeavor to bring them back again to their old slavery: but you know what
he came to; It was Reason of State, that made Saul to spare Agag, and plot the
ruin of David.

It was Reason of State, that made Jeroboam to set up Calves in Dan and Bethel.

It was Reason of State, (and a shrewd one too) when Achitophel caused
Absalom, to defile his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel. You know
what end they both came to. It was the same, that caused Abner, first, to take
part with the house of Saul, and that caused Joab to kill him after he came to
be his Rival in Fame, and the Favor of David: their Ends were both bloody.

Hence it was, that Solomon having pardoned Adonijah, thought fit afterward to
put him to death, upon a very slender occasion.

And Jehu, though he had Warrant from God to destroy all the house of Ahab his
Master; yet, because in the Execution of it, he mingled Reason of State, in
relation to his own Interest, and minded the Establishment of himself thereby,
more than the Command and Honor of God, in the Execution of Justice: therefore
God cursed him for his pains, threatening by the mouth of the Prophet Hosea, to
avenge the blood of Ahabs family upon the house of Jehu.

It was Reason of State, that moved Herod to endeavor the destruction of
Christ, as soon as he was born.

It was Reason of State in the Jews, (lest the Romans should come and take
away their Place and Nation) and in Pilate, (lest he should be thought no
friend to Caesar) that made them both join in crucifying the Lord of Glory, and
incur that heavy Curse, which at length fell upon the Jewish Place and Nation.

It is Reason of State, that makes the Pope and the Cardinals stick so close
one to another, and binds them and the Monarchs of Christendom in one common
Interest, for the greatning of themselves, and the inslaving of the People; for
which, a sad destruction does attend them.

It was Reason of State, that destroyed so many millions of men (forboth) in
the Holy War; that so Princes might not have time to take notice of the Popes
Usurpation, nor the People leisure and opportunity to call their Princes to an
account for their unbounded Tyranny.

It was Reason of State, that was pleaded in behalf of Borgia, to justify all
his Villainies, in wading through so much blood and mischief to a Principality
in Italy; but he escaped not, to enjoy the fruit of all his labor.

It was the same Devil, that made Henry the 4 of France, to renounce his
Religion, and turn Papist, to secure himself from Popish Reveng; but God
pur^sht him, and sent a Popish Dagger through his heart.

It made Richard the Third in England, to butcher his own Nephew; for which
vengeance pursued him, being at last tied a thwart a horse back naked and
bloody, like a Calf of the Shambles.

It made Henry the 7* to extinguish the Line of Plantag^n^t, and his Son after
him, not only to dabble his hands in the blood of many, but to persecute the
Protestants, not withstanding that he fell heavy also upon the Papists.

It made his Daughter Mary to fill up the measure of her Fathers iniquities, as
they could not be expiated by the virtues of her sister, and Successor, whose
only fa^^^ was, in following Reason of State so far, as to serve the Interest
of Monarchy, above that of Religion, by upholding an Order of Prelacy; so that
in her the direct Line of that Family ended.

After this, it was wicked Reason of State, that continued Monarchy, and
brought in a Scotch-man upon us. This was James, who was so great an Admirer of
Reason of State, that he adopted it for its own Darling, by the name of
King-craft: and his Motto, No Bishop no King, showed, that he preferred Reason
of State, before the Interest of Religion; as in other things, before honesty:
witness, among many other, his quitting the Cause of God, and the Patatinate,
to keep fair with the house of Austria: for which, and for the same Reason of
State, put in practice by his Son Charles, for the ruin of Religion and
Liberty, by a bloudly war, the whole Family has been brought to ^ad
destruction.

These Examples are sufficient to show that Reason of State, preferred before
the Rule of Honesty, is an Error in Policy with a vengeance; as they that will
not believe, shall be sure to feel i^, since it brings unavoidable Ruin, not
only to particular persons, but upon whole Families, and Nations.

viz. a permitting of the Legislative and Executive Powers of a State, to rest
in one and the same hands and persons. By the Legislative Power, we understand
the Power of making, altering, or repealing Laws, which in all well-ordered
Governments, has ever been lodged in a succession of the supreme Councels of
Assemblies of a Nation.

By the Executive Power, we mean that Power which is derived from the other,
and by their Authority transferred into the hand or hands of one Person, (called
a Prince) or into the hands of many (called States) for the administration of
Government, in the Execution of those Laws. In the keeping of these two Powers
distinct, flowing in distinct Channels, so that they may never meet in one,
save upon some short extraordinary occasion consists the safety of a State.

The Reason is evident; because if the Lawmakers, (who ever have the Supreme
Power) should be also the constant Administrators and Dispencers of Law and
Justice, then (by confequence) the People would be left without Remedy, in case
of Injustice, since no Appeal can lie under Heaven against such as have the
Supremacy; which, if once admitted, were inconsistent with the very intent and
natural import of true Policy: which ever supposes, that men in Power may be
unrighteous; and therefore (presuming the worst) points always, in all
determinations, at the Enormities and Remedies of Government, on the behalf of
the People.

For the clearing of this, it is worthy your observation; that in all Kingdoms
and States whatsoever, where they have had any thing of Freedom among them, the
Legislative and Executive Powers have been managed in distinct hands: That is
to say, the Lawmakers have set down Laws, as Rules of Government; and then put
Power into the hands of others (not their own) to govern by those Rules; by
which means the people were happy, having no Governors, but such as were
liable to give an account of Government to the supreme Council of Lawmakers.
And on the other side, it is no less worthy of a very serious observation; That
Kings and standing States never became absolute over the People, till they
brought both the making and execution of Laws into their own hands: and as
this Usurpation of theirs took place by degrees, so unlimited Arbitrary Power
crept up into the Throne, there to domineet over the World, and defy the
Liberties of the People.

Cicero, in his second Book de Offic., and his third, de Legibus, speaking of
the first institution of Kings, tells us, how they were at first left to govern
at their own discretion without Laws. Then their Wills, and their Words, were
Law, the ma^^ing and execution of Laws was in one and the same hands.

But what was the consequence? Nothing but Injustice, and Injustice without
Remedy, till the People were taught by Necessity to ordain Laws, as Rules
whereby they ought to govern. Then began the meeting of the People successively
in their supreme Assemblies, to make Laws; whereby Kings (in such places as
continued under the Kingly Form) were limited and restrained, so that they
could do nothing in Government, but what was agreeable to Law; for which they
were accountable, as well as other Officers were in other Forms of Government,
to those supreme Councels and Assemblies: Witness all the old stories of
Athens, Sparta, and other Countries of Greece, where you shall find, that the
Law-making, and the Law-executing Powers, were placed in distinct hands under
every Form of Government: For, so much of Freedom they retained still under
every Form, till they were both swallowed up (as they were several times) by an
absolute Domination.

In old Rome, we find Romulus their first King cut in pieces by the Senate, for
taking upon him to make and execute Laws at his own pleasure. And Livy tells
us, that the reason why they expelled Tarquin their last King, was, because he
took the Executive and Legislative Powers both into his own hands, making:
himself both Legislator, and Officer, inconsulto (...) without advice, and in
defiance of the Senate.

Kings being cashiered, then their Standing-Sonates came in play, who making
and executing Laws, by Decrees of their own* soongrew intolerable, and put the
people upon diverse desperate Adventures, to get the Legislative Power out of
their hands, and place it in their own; that is, in a succession of their
Supreme Assemblies: But the Executive Power they left, part in the hands of
Officers of their own, and part in the Senate; in which State it continued some
hundreds of years, to the great happiness and content of all, till the Senate
by sleights and subtilties got both Powers into their own possession again, and
turned all into confusion,

Afterward, their Emperors (though Usurpers) durst not at first turn both
these Powers into the Channel of their own unbounded Will; but did it by
degrees, that they might the more infensibly deprive the people of their
Liberty, till at length they openly made and executed Laws at their own
pleasures, being both Legislators and Officers, without giving (...) and so
there was an end of the Roman Liberty.

To come nearer home, let us look into the old Constitution of the
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms of Europe. We find in the I^^lian States; Venice,
which having the Legislative and Executive Power, confined within the narrow
Pale of its Nobility in the Senate, is not so free as once Florence was with
Siena, Millan, and the rest; before their Dukes, by arrogating both those
Powers to themselves, worm'd them out of their Liberty.

Of all those States there, only Genoa remains in a free posture, by keeping
the Power of Legislation only in their supreme Assemblies, and leaving the
Execution of Law in a titular Duke, and a Council, the keeping of these Powers
asunder within their proper Sphere, is one principal Reason why they have been
able to exclude Tyranny out of their own State, while it has run the Round in
Italy.

What made the Grand Seignior absolute of old, but his engrossing both these
Powers? and of late the Kings of Spain and France? In ancient time the case
stood far otherwise; for in Ambrosio Morales his Chronicle you will find, that
in Spain the Legislative power was lodged only in their supreme Council, and
their King was no more but an elective Officer, to execute such Laws as they
made, and in case of failing, to give them an account, and submit to their
judgments, which was the common practice; as you may see also in Mariana: It
was so also in Aragon, till it was united to Castile, by the Marriage of
Ferdimand, and Isabel; and then both States soon lost their liberty, by the
projects of Ferdimand and his successors, who drew the powers of Legislation
and Execution of Law, within the verge and influence of the Prerogative Royal:
whilst these two powers were kept distinct, then these States were free; but
the engrossing of them in one and the same hands, was the loss of their
Freedom.

France likewise was once as free as any Nation under Heaven, though the King
of late has done all, and been all in all, till the time of Lewis the
eleventh: he was no more but an Officer of State; regulated by Law, to see the
Laws put in execution; and the Legislative Power (that) rested in the Assembly
of the 3. Estates; but Lewis, by snatching both these Powers into the single
hands of himself, and his successors, rookt them of their Liberty; which they
may now recover again, if they have but so much manhood, as to reduce the two
Powers into their ancient, or into better Channels.

This pattern of Lewis was followed close by the late King of England, who by
our ancient Laws, was the same here, that Lewis ought to have been in France,
an Officer in trust, to see to the execution of the Laws: but by aiming at the
same ends which Lewis attained, and straining, by the ruin of Parliaments, to
reduce the Legislative Power, as well as the Executive into his own hands, he
instead of an absolute Tyranny, which might have followed his project, brought
a swift destruction upon himself and Family.

Thus you see it appears, that the keeping of these two Powers distinct, has
been a ground preservative of the peoples Interest, whereas their uniting has
been its ruin all along in so many Ages and Nations.

Policy, observable in the practices of other times and Nations, has been a
reducing transactions, and in Inetrest of the Public, into the disposition and
power of a few particular persons. The ill consequences where of have ever bin
these; that matters were not wont to be carried by fair, freindly, and legal
debates, but by Design and Surprisal; not by freedom, and consent of the
people, in their open Assemblies; but according to the premeditated
Resolutions, and forestalments of Crafty prijectors in private Cabinets, and
Junto's; not according to the true Interest of State, but in order to the
serving of men's ends; not for the benefit, and improvement of the people, but
to keep them under as ignorant of true Liberty, as the Horse and Mule; that
they might be Bridled and Sadled, and Ridden under the wise pretenses of being
Governed and kept in Order. But the Grand and worse consequences of all, has
been this; that such Colleagues, Partners, and Ingrossers of Power having once
brought about their ends by lying practies upon the people; have ever ^a^n into
fits of Emulation against themselves, and the next design has ever bin to rook
their fellows, and rid themselves of competitors, so that at length they have
been their own executioners, and ruined one another. And had it been only the
destruction of themselves, the matter were not considerable; but the people
having by this means been torn with Civil dissentions, and the miseries of
War, by being drawn into Parties, according to their several humors and
affections; the usual event ever was, that in the end they have been seized as
the prey of some single Tyrant.

An example of this there was in the State of Athens, under the Government of
those thirty men, who usurped the power into their own hands, and were
afterward called the thirty Tyrants, for their odious behavior; for Xenophon
tells us, that they drew the determinations of all things into their own
Closets, but seemed to manage them calculis and suffragiis Plebis, by the Votes
of the people, which they had brought to their own devotion in the Assembly, to
countenance their proceedings. And their custom was, if any sort of men
complained, and murmured at their doings; or appeared for the Public,
immediately to snap them off by the loss of life or fortune, under a pretense
of being seditions, and turbulent fellows against the peace of their Tyranny.
These Juncto-men had not been many months in possession; but they began to
quarrel with one another; and the reason why the game went not on, against one
another, was because the people took it out of their hands, and diverted the
course of their spleen against each other, into a care of mutual defense, they
being assaulted on every side, by popular arm and clamors, for the recovery of
liberty. So you see the event of these thirty men's combination, was no less
then a civil War; and it ended in their banishment. But as great a mischief
followed, for a new Junto of ten men got into their places, whose Government
proving little less odious than the (...), gave an occasion to new changes,
which never left shifting, till at last they fell into a single Tyranny. And
the wilder sort of people, having by a sad experience, felt the fruits of their
own error, in following the lusts and parties of particular powerful persons,
grew wise; and combining with the honester sort, they all as one man, set their
shoulders to the work, and restored the primitive Majesty, and Authority of
their supreme Assemblies.

Herodotus in his second Book, tells us, that Monarchy being abolished in
Egypt, after the death of King Setho, and a Declaration published for the
freedom of the people, immediately the Administration of all Affairs, was
ingross't in the hands of twelve Grandees, who having made themselves secure
against the people in a few years, fell to quarrelling with one another (as the
manner is) about their share in the Government. This drew the people into
several parties, and so a civil War ensued; wherein Psummeticus (one of the
twelve) having slain all his Partners, left the people in the lurch, and
instead of a free State, seated himself in the possession of a single Tyranny.

But of all old instances, the most famous are the two Triumvirates that were
in Rome. The first was that of Pomp^y, Caesar, and Crassus, who having drawn
the affairs of the Empire, and the whole World into their own particular hands,
acting and determining all in a private ^ unto of their own, without the advice
or consent of the Senate and people, unless it were now and then to make
stalking horses of them, for the more clearly conveyance of some unpleasing
design: These men, having made an agreement among themselves, that nothing
should be done in the Commonwealth, but what pleased their own humor, it was
not long ere the spirit of Ambition set them flying at the faces of one
another, and drew the whole World upon the Stage, to act that bloody Tragedy,
whose Ca^astrophe was the death of Pompey, and the Dominion of Caesar. The
second Trimuvirate was erected after the fatal stab given to Caesar in the
Senate, between Octavius (afterward Emperor by the name of Augustus,) Lopidus,
and Antony: these having drawn all Affairs into their own hands, and shared the
World between them, presently fell abandying against one another. Augustus
picking a quarrel with Lepidus, gave him a lift out of his Authority, and
confined him to a close imprisonment in the City. This being done first, he had
the more hope and opportunity next for the outing of Anthony: he picks a
quarrel with him too, begins a new civil War, wherein Rome and a great part
of the World was engaged to serve his ambition; and things being brought to the
decision of a Battle, and the ruin of Anthony, he afterward seated, and
secured himself in the enjoyment of a single Tyranny.

Omitting many other instances here in England, it is worthy observation, that
in the great contest between Henry the third, and the Barons, about the
liberties of themselves and the people, the King being forced at length to
yield, the Lords instead of freeing the Nation indeed, engrossed all power into
their own hands, under the name of the Twenty-foure Conservators of the
Kingdom, and behaved themselves like totidem. Tyranny, so many Tyrants acting
all in their own Names, and in (...) of their own, wholly neglecting, or else
overruling Parliaments. But then not agreeing among themselves, there were
three or four of them defeated the other twenty, and drew the entire management
of Affairs into their own hands, viz. the Earls of Leicester, Gloucester,
Hereford, and Spencer; yet it continued so not long; for, Leicester getting all
into his own power, fell at enmity with Gloucester, and was defeated by him.

At length, Leicester putting his Fortune to a Battle, was slain; and the King
thereupon, getting all power back again took advantage of that opportunity for
the greatning of himself, and Prerogative.

And so you see, All that the people got by the effusion of their blood, and
loss of their peace, was, That instead of one Tyrant, they had Twenty Four, and
then Four; and after them, a single Usurper, (which was Monfort, Earl of
Leicester) and he being gone, they were forced to serve their old Tyrant Henry
the Third again, who by this means, became the more secure and firm in his
Tyranny: wherein if they had dealt like men of honor, and made the Nation as
free as they pretended, not engrossing all into their own private hands, but
instating the liberty of England, Paramount above the regal prerogative, in a
due and constant course of successive Parliaments, (without which, liberty is
but a mere name and shadow) then all the succeeding inconveniences had been
surely prevented: the bloody bickering afterward might have been avoided,
their own persons and honors preserved, Kings either cashiered or regulated; as
they ought to have been, and the whole Nation freed from those after-gripes and
pa^gs; inflicted by that Henry and his corrupt Line of successors.

The World affords many instances of this kind, but these are sufficient to
manifest the fatal consequences that have happened, in permitting public
(...) and interests to be engrossed, and rest in the power of a few particular
persons; and that it deserves to be marked (as one faith) with a black Cole, as
a most permitions error ^^ Policy.



There is a notable faction we read of in this Roman story, which was that of
the Decemviri, who being entrusted with the Government, and the time of their
trust expired, they instead of making a Resignation, combined together for the
Perpetuation of the power in their own hands, contrary to the intent of their
first Election, and in defiance of that which twelve months before had been
declared the interest of the Commonwealth. The grand Engineer among them was
Appius Clandius, who managed his design by promising the Nobility, that if
they would stick to the Decemviri, then the Decemviri would stick to them, and
join with them, in keeping under the people and their Tribunes, and to defeat
them of their successive Assemblies. By this means he sowed the seeds of an
immortal enmity between the Senate and the people; though himself and his
Colleagues were notwithstanding deceived of their own establishment, and soon
casheired from their imperious Domination.

If we consider also what befell Carthage, and how it came to ruin: the story
tells us, it was occasioned by their Factions, the whole Senate being divided
betwixt two potent Families of Hannibal and Hanno; by which means they were
disinabled, from carrying on their War with Unanimity and alacrity, as was
requisite against such wary Gamesters, as the Romans, who made such use of
their Civil Dissentions, that they soon laid the glory of that famous Republic
in the dust.

It was Faction and Civil Dissension that destroyed Rome it self; that is to
say, her Liberty, and made her stoop under the Yoke of Caesar.

And it must not be omitted, that when her Liberty was first established, and
Tarquin expelled, he had like to have made his way back again, by reason of
their Divisions. And though he mist his aim there, yet Pisistratus, another
Tyrant, being driven out of Athens, made a shift to get in again, by reason of
their mutual Divisions.

It was the same Devil of Faction, and Civil Dissension, ( as Philip de Comines
tells us) that made way for the Turk into Hungaria, as it let him in before
into Constantinople, that admitted the Goths and Vandals into Spain and Italy;
the Romans into Jerusalem, first under Pompey; and afterward under Vespatian
and Titus.

It was the cause why Genoa, for a time was content to submit to the Family of
Sforza, Dukes of Millan. It brought the Spaniard into Sicily and Naples; and
the French once into Millain, where they outed the aforenamed Family of Sferza.

From hence, therefore, let us conclude, that no Error is more dangerous, no
Treason more pernicious to a Commonwealth, than the driving of Faction.

Machiavel, to be this, because the greatest part of the world being wicked,
unjust, deceitful, full of treachery and circumvention, there is a Necessity
that those which are downright, and confine themselves to the strict Rule of
Honesty, must ever look to be overreached by the Knavery of others. And take
this for certain, (says he) Quise virum bonum omnibus partibus profiteri
studet, eum certe inter tot non bonos periclituri necesse est.) He which
endeavors to approve himself an honest man to all parties, must of necessity
miscarry among so many that are not honest: Because some men are wicked and
persidious, I must be so too. This is a sad inference, and fit only for the
practice of Italy, where he wrote it.

The ancient Heathen would have loathed this; and the Romans (who were the
noblest of them all) did in all their actions detest it, reckoning plain
honesty to have been the only Policy, and the foundation of their Greatness, (
^avendo pietati fideique, populus Romanus ad tantum fastigii pervenerit) The
people of Rome attained to so great a height, by observing Faith and Piety:
whereof you shall see an Instance or two.

In the War between them, and Porsena King of the Tuscans, it so happened that
their City was besieged by Porsena: but peace being made, upon some
advantageous Conditions for the Tuscans, the Romans, for the performance of
their Conditions, were forced to yield up diverse Noble Virgins.

These Virgins, after some time, made an escape from the Tuscans, and came back
to Rome, but were demanded again.

Hereupon the Senate, though they were then recovered, and in a posture, able
to have defied the Tuscans, and denied the performance of those harsh
Conditions, chose rather to preserve their Faith inviolable, then to take the
present advantage; and so delivered up the Virgins.

The behavior also of Attilius Regulus, is very memorable, who being prisoner
at Carthage, and condemned to a cruel Death, was, notwithstanding, permitted to
go to Rome, upon his bare Paroll, to propound certain Terms to the Senate;
which if they yielded, then he was to have his liberty: if not, he was to
return again to Carthage, and to suffer.

The Senate not yielding, He, rather then violate his Faith, did return, and
suffer, being put into a Barrel spiked with Nails, and tumbled down a Hill by
the Carthag^nians. No^ was i^ the temper only of a few persons; but general
throughout the whole Nation, as might be shown by innumerable Examples;
especially in their Leagues and Treaties with other Nations.

But that you may the better know, and avoid the impious Impostors, I shall
represent them in Machiavels own language; who in that unworthy book of his,
entitled, The Prince, has made a most unhappy Description of the Wiles that
have been used by those Jugglers; and thereby left a Lesson upon Record, which
has been practiced ever since by all the State-Rooks in Christendom. And
therefore, since they have made so ill use of it, I suppose the best way to
prevent the further operation of the poison, is, to set it down here before
you, (as I shall do verbati^, without adding or diminishing a syllable) and
then make two or three Inferences thereupon, for the practice of the people.

In what manner Princes ought to keep their Words. How commendable in a Prince
it is to keep his Word, and live with Integrity, not making use of Cunning and
Subtilty, every one knows well: yet we see by Experience, in these our days,
that those Princes have effected great matters, who have made small reckoning
of keeping their words, and have known by their Craft, how to turn and wind men
about, and in the end overcome those who have grounded upon the Truth.

You must then know, there are two kinds of Combating or Fighting: the one, by
Right of the Laws: the other, merely by Force. That first way is proper to Men:
The other is also common to Beasts. But because the first many times suffices
not, there is a necessity to make recourse to the second: wherefore, it behooves
a Prince to know how to make good use of that part which belongs to a Beast, as
well as that which is proper to a Man.

This part has been covertly showed to Princes by ancient Writers; who say,
that Achilles, and many others of those ancient Princes, were entrusted to
Chiron the Centaure, to be brought up under his Discipline: The moral of this,
having for their Teacher, one that was half a Beast, and half a Man, was
nothing else, but that it was needful for a Prince to understand how to make
his advantage of the one, and other Nature, because neither could subsist
without the other.

A Prince then being necessitated to know how to make use of that part
belonging to a Beast, ought to serve himself of the Conditions of the Fox, and
the Lion; for the Lion cannot keep himself from Snares, nor the Fox defend
himself against the Wolves. He had need then be a Fox, that he may beware of
the Snares; and a Lion, that he may scare the Wolves. Those that stand wholly
upon the Lion, understand not themselves.

And therefore a wise Prince cannot, nor ought not to keep his Faith given,
when the observance thereof turns to disadvantage, and the occasions that made
him promise, are past: for if men were all good, this Rule would not be
allowable; but being they are full of mischief, and will not make it good to
thee, neither art thou tied to keep it with them: nor shall a Prince ever want
lawful occasions to give color to this breach. Very many modern Examples
hereof might be alleged, wherein might be showed how many Peaces concluded,
and how many Promises made, have been ^^olated and broken by Infidelity of
Princes: and ordinarily things have best succeeded with him that has bin
nearest the Fox in condition.

But it is necessary to understand, how to set a good color upon this
Disposition, and be able to feign and dissemble thoroughly; and men are so
simple, and yield so much to the present Necessities, that he who has a mind
to deceive, shall always find another that will be deceived. I will not
conceal any of the Examples that have been of late; Alexander the sixth never
did any thing else, than deceive men, and never meant otherwise, and always
found whom to work upon; yet never was there man that would protest more
effectually, nor aver any thing with more solemn Oaths, and observe them less
then he: nevertheless, his Couzenage thrived well with him, for he knew how to
play his part cunningly.

Therefore is there no necessity for a Prince to be endued with all those
above written qualities, but it behooves well that he seem to be so: or rather
I will boldly say this, that having those qualities, and always regulating
himself by them, they are hurtful; but seeming to have them, they are
advantageous, as to seem pittyfull, faithful, mild, religious, and indeed to
be so (provided with all thou be of such a composition, that if need require
thee to use the contrary, thou can, and know how to apply thy self
thereto.) And it suffices to conceive this, that a Prince, and especially a new
Prince, cannot observe all these things, for which men are held good, he being
often forced, for the maintenance of his State, to do contrary to his faith,
charity, humanity, and religion. And therefore it behooves him to have a mind so
disposed as to turn and take the advantage of all winds and fortunes; and as
formerly I said, not forsake the good while he can; but to know to make use of
the evil upon necessity. A prince then ought to have a special care, that he
never let fall any words, but what are all seasoned with the five above written
qualities: and let him seem to him that sees and knows him, all pity, all
faith, all integrity, all humanity, all religion; not is there any thing more
necessary for him to seem to have, than the last quality: for all men in
general judge thereof, rather by the sight than by the touch; for every man,
may come to the sight of him, few come to the touch and feeling of him; every
man may come to see what thou seem; few come to understand and perceive what
thou art: and those few dare not oppose the opinion of many, who have the
Majesty of state to protect them. And in all men's actions, especially those of
Princes, wherein there is no judgment to appeal unto, men forbear to give their
censures till the events, and ends of thing. Let a Prince therefore take the
surest courses he can to maintain his life and state, the means shall always
be thought honorable, and commended by every one: for the vulgar is ever taken
with the appearance and event of a thing, and for the most part of the people,
they are but the vulgar, the others that are but few, take place where the
vulgar have no subssistance. A Prince there is in these days, whom I shall not
do well to name, that preaches nothing but peace and faith, but had he kept the
one and the other, several times had they taken from him his State and
reputation.

This is the old Court Gospel, which has gained many thousand of Proselytes,
among the great ones, from time to time, and the inferences arising thence in
behalf of the people, in breife are these: That since the great ones of the
world, have been very few that have avoided this doctrine, therefore it
concerns the people to keep a strict hand and eye upon them all, and impose not
overmuch or long confidence in any.

If the Right of laws be the way of men, and force of beasts and great ones,
not only advised, but inclined to the latter, then it concerns any Nation or
people to secure themselves, and keep Great men from degenerating into beasts,
by holding up of law, liberty, privilege, birthright, elective power, against
the ignoble beastly way of powerful domination.

If of all beasts, a Prince should some times resemble the Lion, and sometimes
the Fox, then people ought to observe great ones in both the disguises, and be
sure to cage the Lion, and unkennel the Fox, and never leave till they have
stripped the one, and unrais'd the other.

If a Prince cannot, and ought not to keep his faith given, when the observance
thereof turns to disadvantage, and the occasions that made him promise, are
past; then it is the Interest of the people, never to trust any Princes, nor
engagements and promises of men in power, but ever to preserve a power within
themselves, either to reject them, or to hold them to the performance whether
they will or no. And if Princes shall never want occasions to give color to
this breach, then also it concerns the people, ever to make sure of the
Instance, and not suffer themselves to be deluded with colors, shadows, and
mere pretenses.

Lastly, if it be necessary for great ones to fain and dissemble thoroughly;
because men are so simple and yield so much to the present necessity (as
Machivel says;) and in regard he that has a mind to deceive, shall always
find another that will be deceived: then it concerns any people or Nation, to
make a narrow search ever into the men, and their pretenses and necessities,
whether they be fained or not; and if they discover any deceit has been used,
then they deserve to be slaves, that will be deceived any longer. Thus I have
noted the prime Errors of Government, and Rules of Policy. I shall now conclude
with a word of Advice, in order to the choosing of the Supreme Assemblies.

Since it appears, that the right, liberty, welfare, and safety of a people,
consists in a due succession of their supreme Assemblies: surely then, the
right constitution and orderly motion of them, is of the greatest consequence
that can be, there being so much imbarqued in this Vessel, that if it should
miscarry, all is irreparably lost, unless it can be recovered again out of the
Sea of confusion. Therefore, as at all times there ought to be an especial
care had to the Composure and Complexion of those great Assemblies, so much
more after the confusion of a Civil War, where it is ever to be supposed,
there will be many discontented humors a working, and laboring to insinuate
themselves into the body of the people, to undermine the settlement and
security of the Commonwealth, that by gaining an interest and share with the
better sort, in the supreme Authority, they may attain those corrupt ends of
Policy, which were lost by Power.

In this case without question, there are several men that ought to be taken
into a strict consideration* There is the old Malignant and the new; against
whom, not only the doors are to be shut, but every hole and cranny ought to be
stopped, for fear they creep into Authority. There is likewise a came Beast, more
dangerous than the other two, which is that Amphibious animal, the neutrall of
Laodicea, that can live in either Element, sail with any wind on every point
of the compass, and strike in with Malignants of every sort, upon any occasion*

This is he that will undo all, if he be not avoided; for in the form of an
Angel of Light, he most slightly carries on the works of darkness. Let not him
then, as to our present case, be so much as named upon an Election. Thus much
for the Constitution of the supreme Assembly, or the manner of settling
Authority upon the close of a Civil War, for the recovery of Liberty. What
remains then, but that upon due caution for excluding the wild Geese and the
came, the Malignant and the Neutrall, such a people may reasonably be put into
possession of their right and interest in the Legislative power, and of all
enjoyment of it, in a succession of their supreme Assemblies?

The only way to preserve liberty in the hands of a people, that have gained
it by the Sword, is to put it in the peoples hands, that is, into the hands of
such, as by a contribution of their purses, strength, and counsels, have all
along asserted it, without the least stain of corruption, staggering^*
apostasy; for in this case, these only are to be reckoned the people: the rest
having either by a traiterous Engagement Compliance, Neutrality, or Apostasy,
as much as in them lies, destroyed the people, and by consequence made a
forteiture of all their Rights and immunities, as Members of a people. In this
case therefore men ought to have a courage; and to have a care of the course of
Election, and trust God with the success of a righteous Action; for nothing can
be more righteous and necessary, than that a people should be put into
possession of their native right and freedom: However, they may abuse it, it is
their right to have it, and the want of it is a greater inconvenience, and
draws greater inconveniences after it, than any can be pretended to arise
from the enjoyment, though they were presented in a multiplying glass, to the
eyes of discerning men. But now, as this holds true at all times, in all
Nations, upon the like occasions of Liberty newly purchased, so much more in
any Nation, where freedom in a successive course of the peoples Assemblies,
has once bee^ solemnly acknowledged and declared to be the interest of the
Commonwealth; for, then a depriving the people of their due, is a foundation
for broils and divisions; and as Cicero defines faction to be a deviation from
the declared interest of State: so in this case, if it happen that any shall
desert a Commonwealth in its declared Interest, they immediately lose the name
and honor of Patriots, and become Parties in a Faction.

FINIS.
There is lately Printed these Books, and sold by Tho. Brewster, at the Three
Bibles, by Paul's, viz.
THE Retired Man's Meditations; or, the Mystery and Power of Godliness, shining
forth in the Living Word, to the unmasking the Mystery of Iniquity, in the most
refined and purest Forms; And withal, representing to view;

1 The Riches and Fullness of Christ's Person, as Mediator.

2. The Natural and Spiritual Man, in their proper distinctions.

3. The Reign, and Kingdom of Christ, in the Nature, Limits, and extent
thereof. By Henry Vane, Knight.

A Breviary of the History of the Parliament of England, in Three Parts: First,
the Cause and Beginning of the Civil Wars of ENGLAND.

Secondly, A short mention of the progress of that Civil War.

Thirdly, a Compendious Relation of the Original and Progress of the Second
Civil War: written by T. May, Esquire,

Lazarus and His Sisters Discourse of Paradise: Or, A Conference about the
excellent things of the other World.


