To Preserve the EAST INDIA TRADE.
IN such sort as to make it National truly for the good of the Public, and so
that the Landed Men of the Kingdom who are most burdened with Taxes, and are
the only Persons can and will suffer in their Rents and Estates, unless
concerned some way in Interest by the now intended increase of this Mighty East
India Trade may not be prejudiced, but rather much Advantaged thereby, and
without paying down any thing for it.

It Is Proposed,

That this Trade should be settled by Parliament, so as to be carried on by a
Joint Stock Exclusive to others, and under such Regulations as shall be
expressed in the Act.

That this Trade should be Managed by a Number of Persons (less then Fifteen
enough) to be Chosen by Parliament to whom they should be Accountable, and that
upon Oath, when required.

That that Number of Persons shall (by a common Seal) be Empowered to take up
Money at Interest not exceeding 1400000 l for carrying on of this Trade at such
time and in such proportions as shall by them be found needful for it.

That the Money so taken up and Employed in this Trade, shall always be liable
to pay Principal and Interest to the Lenders thereof as the same becomes due
and be required. And,

That there may be no fear of borrowing Money enough to thus carry on well this
New intended East India Trade, it is farther Proposed.

That there should be settled for ever, one single Months Tax in a year, after
the rate of 70000 l. per Mensem as a Fund to a perpetual Interest at 5 per Cent
of 1400000 l but not to be raised but when found needful by the Persons
appointed to Manage the Trade.

So that besides the Money Employed in this Trade, and the Profit of it, out of
which the Interest of the Money to be Borrowed for the carrying it on, may be
easily paid, here will be Land Security as a perpetual Fund for the Interest
settled, so that should the Stock fail, the Lenders will be secure, which will
give the Company such a Credit, they can never want Money at the lowest
Interest that any where it can be had. And,

Thus the Profits first arising, may go to clear the Money first Borrowed, and
after that is paid, to the Owners of Land in Proportion to their Estates as
Rated to this single Months Tax; and to make this effectual, the whole Stock
and its Proceed must for ever remain so fixed to the Land it self, that it
shall be in the power of no Man to sell the one without selling the other at
all, and it may be hence hoped, that after the first five or six years (without
paying one Penny) the Landed Men of the Nation may have the whole Benefit of
this great East India Trade. And,

When any Dividend (after the Money borrowed to carry on the Trade is repaid)
shall be made of the Profits, it ought never to be under 15 per Cent, which
(upon a Stock of 1400000 l to be kept always entire) amounts to 210000 l and
that at the rate of 70000 l. per Mensem will be a just three Months Tax, which
on such Dividend (to yearly be hoped for) should be paid to the Sheriff of the
County, and by him be sent to each Division or Hundred of his County, and
thence to each Parish, where the Owner of Land will receive as much Money as
his Land would be assest at for a three Months Tax after the rate of 70000 l.
per Mensem on every such Dividend made. And this way of deviding will be very
easy an^ safe. And,

This would make it National truly, and a great Advantage to all, and Landed
Men only being therein concerned, and such a Fund of Security settled, the
Stock might at any time be easily enlarged (if found needful) for the Public
Advantage and Profit; so that 'twould quickly outdo all Companies that ever
set up in England, be a general Good, and to be never complained of, which any
other (on a Stock raised by Subscriptions) will very soon be, and by especially
such who may after have Money, they would gladly put into it, having not at the
first subscribed to it.

To this it may and will be objected and said,

This is matter of Trade, and best managed by Merchants who know one another,
and so are only able to choose fit Managers for it, whose Interest in a Stock
(to be raised by Subscriptions) will always oblige them to act the best they
can for it; and Merchants being this way Excluded, where will you find able and
honest Men to undertake it, that will mind and manage the Trade to the best
advantage, so well as such Merchants would do that might have great Stocks
themselves in that Trade.

Answer,

Merchants are not so Excluded, but that they may be chosen for the Managers of
it, and it is not to be doubted, but that the Parliament may choose as able and
honest Men as Subscribers can, for a Committee to Manage this Trade, and those
chosen by Parliament, being made Accountable to it upon Oath, are likely to act
as honestly at least as a Committee chosen by Subscribers will do for the
general good of this Stock, to the best of their knowledge and skill, and it is
if they should have (besides a Sallary of two Guinies Weekly) the ^me
Encouragement so to act for the good of the Stock, as if they ^emselves had
considerable Stocks in the Trade, all which may well ^us be contrived.

Suppose these Managers are obliged to meet twice a Week certain, ^d oftener if
needful to take care of this Stock, and that for such day ^ the two which they
Personally appear, to have one Guiney paid ^em, In lieu of a Sallary of 100 l
yearly, but not to be paid, but ^ly for the days they appear, which will make
them more duly at^d. And,

That for every Dividend made (which it is hoped may be yearly of 15 per Cent as
aforesaid, that there should be paid two per Cent for that Dividend, which as
aforesaid supposing it to be 15 per Cent on 1400000 l Stock, makes 210000 l and
for such Dividend supposing 2 per Cent. paid to the Managers, makes 4200 l
which if divided twixt fourteen Managers, makes 300 l each, and is equal
advantage to them, and will make them act full as well for the Common good as
if they had each 2000 l. Stock in the Trade, and yet tha^ advantage of 2 per
Cent. for each Dividend (supposing 210000 ^ which is 15 per Cent each year
divided) together with a Sallary o^ 100 l yearly for 14 Managers of it, amounts
to but 2 s in the 100 l unless a Dividend made, and then but to yearly 5600 l
which is 8 ^ in each 100 l only on the whole Stock (supposed 1400000 l) for
taking this care of the Trade, which most easily will bear such ^ Charge.

Other Objections no doubt may be made, and so will by the Merchant and such
whose Interest and Care is either to maintain the Old Company or else by way of
Subscriptions for their own sakes to set up a New, b^ those and all other
Objections may, it is hoped, be easily Answered when made, and Gentlemen are
desired to take notice that if this be not do^ now, 'twill be One and Twenty
Years more, ere it can.

December, the 13th 1692.

