AN ANSWER TO SOME QVERIES Put out by one John Pendarves, in a BOOK, called,
Arrows against Babylon, etc.

For the People called, QUAKERS To Answer.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

AN ANSWER TO SOME QVERIES Put out by one John Pendarves, in a BOOK, called,
Arrows against Babylon, etc.
Query 1. WHether are you willing that the depth of your persuasion or opinion
touching Jesus Christ his being now contained in the Heavens, the raising of
our dead bodies after natural death, the trial of our Spirits and Doctrines
according to the Scriptures, should be clearly and openly known and published?

Ans. What we have revealed in us concerning Jesus Christ, the death and
resurrection, trials of Spirits and Doctrines, we are willing should be clearly
and openly known; Therefore do we publish the same, as we are commanded, to all
Nations; and this is according to Scripture, for which we are opposed by you
that are in Opinions, Imaginations and Persuasions, by your carnal Wisdom
from the Letter, to which the Spiritual knowledge of Christ, his Doctrine and
resurrection according to the Sciptures, is a mystery, neither can your depths
of fallen Wisdom, Persuasions, or Opinions, find it out, nor try that Spirit
which reveals it to the babes, but hides it from the prudent.

Qu. 2. Whether do you not by many of your sayings, which admit of a double
construction, craftily hide your persuasions, in many things, from the sight of
some honest people, who take you to hold the same truth with Believers in
general, concerning Christ, the Scriptures, and the resurrection of the dead?
Do you not endeavor to make them believe you hold otherwise in some things
then you do; and is not this distimulation at the best, or lying, after the
manner of Annanias and Saphirah?

Ans. From honest people we would hide nothing; therefore to the principle of
honesty (which is the Light of Christ in them) we direct them, that with the
spirit of truth they may be led to know what to believe, and be guided out of
all your craftiness, who under pretense of believers, draw people from the
spirit to things acted in the flesh, as thou who in thy book calls them
saints, who may be like the most vain men in their foolith fashions, and found
too light in the true balance, so much know thou of a saint, what is his
weight and likeness to, and such is dssimulation at the best, and know not a
believers truth, nor their Christ, nor resurrection, according to the
scriptures, who reckon your selves under the name of saints and believers, but
never came so far as Annanias and Saphirah, who owned that Doctrine preached by
them that left all and wandered up and down to and fro, and left their carnal
relations in obedience to the voice of Christ, as is declared in the Scripture,
which thou could reproach and slander, to be contrary to scripture, as in thy
fifteen query; and this is worse than the manner of Annanias and Saphirah.

Qu. 3. Whether your selves, even all of you, be not men and women of sinful
failings and imperfections, as are those godly people you cry down? Does not
the Light within you show you this? if not, tell us who are the persons amongst
you without their failings or imperfections, and how came they so to be?

Answ. The Light within us thy slanderous spirit full of confusion, in saying
that we cry down godly people, as also thy signifying them to be God-like who
are of sinful failings and imperfections; so thou show what thou know of
his likeness, and thy self a child of darkness; and by him who is no respector
of persons, come we to be set free from sinful failings, as by the Light we
behold him who is our perfection, so are we changed from imperfection into the
same image, from glory to glory, even by the spirit, by which spirit we bear
witness against sin and imperfection, for which we are accused to cry down
godly people, by such as love their sin, yet would have the name of godliness.

Qu. 4. Do you in passing your judgments of the Congregations of believers, as
well look after those things which are commendable, as those things which are
condemnable in their practices? do you not overlook the example of Christ in
this, who in his message to the Church of Ephesus, writes in praise of the
godly things in them, Rev. 2.2. and particularly, that they hated the doctrine
of the Nicholaitans, though withal he reproves them for leaving their first
Love; and Sardis Church being reproved, some few names are accepted? do not you
on the contrary cry them down in the general without any mercy.

Ans. The judgment which we pass is not ours, but his that sent us, which is
not passed upon Churches of believers, but upon the Synagogues of Satan, who
say they are Jews and are not, neither do we thereby judge that which is
commendable, but that which covers the serpent under a pretense of religion,
and this is not contrary to the example of Christ: And whereas thou tellest of
Churches, and hating the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, when we see you leave
that Doctrine, and go out to declare against it where it is practiced, as the
Ministers of Christ ever did, then is there some plea for your names to be
excepted, in the mean time be not angry that we cry them down in general, who
are found in that doctrine and Babylonish worship, (though not without mercy to
them that come out of it) nor think you to hide your selves by crying out of
the Priests, and your selves not come out of the rest of the relicques; a
measure, though of a first Love there was amongst you, which you have lost
above all forms in the Nation, and are run into the abominations, and have
bowed and conformed to uphold and maintain the relicques of the Papal
Priesthood: And think not pulling off your Ribbans and Laces will excuse you, so
long as you withdraw the shoulder from things of greater weight, which must all
down at Babylons fall; though we rejoice to hear so much from you of
reformation, was it done in the power and obedience of the spirit of truth and
not of envy, thereby to reproach others whom the Lord has led out to bear
witness against the rest of the worlds vanities, pride, and false worships; but
seeing you pretend your reformation in this point from the Scriptures, search
them over again, and let the Light of Christ in your consciences judge if they
be not as large both in precept and example under the Gospel, for the form of
sound words without partiality to deny respect of persons, to bear witness
against the Idol-worship openly where it is performed, as the manner of the
Saints was, and is, to the suffering the spoiling of the goods, yea the loss of
life, rather than to uphold the Image by bowing to it in the least measure, or
honoring the pride in another, which you know to be of the devil in your
selves; and much more you shall find in the Scriptures, left as an example,
wherein the cross is too heavy for the carnal mind; and for shame cease to
call your selves Churches of Christ, further then you can rejoice in their
cross.

Qu. 5. and 6. Whether your declaring against instrumental Teaching, yet going
about diverse of you, informing and instructing your selves and others who are
free to hear you, does not discover a gross contradiction betwenen your
professed principles and practice, and plainly show that you would have them
hear none but you? And whether this be right to set them against instrumental
teaching, to bring them to hear your declaring, as some of you call your
speaking, altering only the name? whether instrumental, teaching be unsuitable
to the new Covenant? if so, why did Christ, being ascended, appoint Pastors and
Teachers, in the Church, to continue till we all come into the unity of the
Faith, etc. Thus ordaining Ministers for the work, while work remains for the
ministry, did Christ burden his Saints with needless appointments?

An. 5. and 6. Those that went about from place to place, preaching the Gospel
from house to house, informing others, and instructing them to believe in the
light, and to wait for the teachings of Christ, etc. such we do not declare
against, yet did these declare against such who was false Apostles, who sat at
home, and crept into houses, and led them from the spirit into carnal
Ordinances, thereby keeping them ever learning and laden with sin; and such
(our practice plainly shows) we would not have people to hear, not do we hereby
deny Isntrumental, but Traditional Teaching: And you that sit at home, and
reproach them that go about, have little cause to boast, as though you were out
of Babylon, who cannot own the form of the Ministry of Christ, much less do
you know the Power: And for those thou tellest of, who received gifts for the
perfecting of the Saints, till they all came to the unity of the Faith; Thou
know them not, nor their Gifts, nor their Work, who sits at home reproaching
them, and incensing the World against them, pleading for sin and imperfection,
which none of them ever did, and seeking occasion against them who have
received gifts for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the work of the
Ministry, which thou can not endure to hear tell of, showing how little thou
know of the end of that Ministry.

Qu. 7. Whether the Scriptures you bring to oppose Gospel Ordinances, do not
serve only to make void Circumcision, with other Ordinances of Moses Law, and
to witness against walking after the tradition of men, with the carnal formal
practice, or Idolizing of true Gospel Ordinances? all, you say, making not at
all against a spiritual practice of Church-Ordinances, as breaking bread, and
exhorting one another, etc. wherein the Saints have the footsteps of the stock
in the primitive times going before them, and the appointment of Christ for the
continuance of these till his coming, which must be understood of his personal
coming the second time, be being come in the spirit with great glory, when he
gave those commands, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. Revel. 2.25. Heb. 1^.25.

Ans. In this Query thou have sufficiently showed thy folly and confusion;
First, in charging us falsely to oppose Gospel Ordinances, and then confessing
that all we say makes not at all against the spiritual practice of
Church-Ordinances: Art not thou ashamed to charge us with the opposing that,
which thou confessest we say not a word against? Or do thou accuse us for
speaking against carnal performances? thy bottle must be empted of this
Darkness before thou know Christ's appearance, personal or spiritual, though
with the rest of the dark world, thou art putting the day far off thee, and his
appearance whom the Saints waited for, and received, which thou with their
words would put a far off.

Qu. 8. Whether it is not better to wait on God in his good old ways,
recorded in his word, expecting his work to be gradually carried on, as the
grouth of a building, or of a Plant, or Child, so running with patience the
spiritual race set before us? Or, as the manner of some is, to forsake the
principles of says (whereof the Saints have had so great experience) in hope
to start up suddenly from a low stature, into perfection, by embracing a new
Doctrine.

An. The good old way thou know not, by which he carried on his work,
neither do thou know his word, who would wrest the Letter to oppose it, who
art set in the seat of darkness, condemning them who leave all to follow
Christ, to be contrary to the Scriptures; so much know thou of the spiritual
race, or the principle of faith, or the experience the Saints have of it, who
shows thy experience and knowledge of a saints life, who calls them saints
who are found light, and the most vain men in their foolish fashions; and thy
faith serves thee to plead against a low estate to be brought into perfection,
reproaching that as new Doctrine, for which end the ministry of Christ was
given, as thy self has instanced in thy sixth Query, and now calls it a
start-up, showing thy confusion and envy to perfection.

Qu. 9. Whether Jesus Christ has not prayed for those who believe through the
word of the Apostles, according to John 17.20. And if so, Whether they are not
in a good and safe way, who believe accordingly? And whether it be not better
to credit their testimony so fully confirmed by the Lord, and acknowledged by
the Saints for many generations, than to forgo that to embrace and follow the
sayings of some of your company?

Answ. Yea, Christ has prayed for those that believe through the word, and
such are in a safe way; but what is this to those that have not the word in
them, whose belief stands only in the Letter? if such be in a safe way, then
who is it that is not? Many believes, both John and James, Peter and Paul, and
the rest, that what they said was true, which never knew the prayers of Christ,
the Word, nor that testimony by the Lord confirmed, neither do we desire any
who have it to forgo it, but such as never had it are in little danger to
forgo it, and these are seen to be them whom thou art encouraging.

Qu. 10. What is that faith which the Spirit speaks expressly some shall depart
from in the later days, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1.

Qu. 11. Whether that Doctrine, which in some is no more, but look to the light
within, with a curse upon disobedience, and a blessing upon obedience
thereunto, be that glorious Gospel preached by Christ and his Apostles, holding
forth good news to all people? Or, whether it be not a reviving of the old
doctrine of Justification by works, wherein the mystery of iniquity works
to darken the grace of God, in justifying the ungodly without works freely, and
to make void the sufferings of Christ, Romans 3.24. and the 4. chap. 5. Gal. 3.1.

Ans. That faith was spiritual, and the gift of God, which when they had
forsaken and made shipwreck of, their consciences became seared, yet could they
profess the Letter of the scriptures with great zeal, as has appeared ever
since that departure there spoken of, and the seducing spirits are such as are
gone out from within into the world, whither thou art leading, who art
reproaching the Light within, as though it was not the Gospel preached by
Christ and his Apostles, when Christ says, I am the Light of the world; and
the kingdom of God is within you; and the Apostle says, By the Light that
shined in their hearts, did they come to the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus; and Christ in you the hope of glory; and this alone is the
good news to all people, which the seducing spirits that are gone into carnal
things would lead from, and therefore Christ says to his, go not forth: and
who has Christ the Light in them, with his works, and they in him, here is
justification by Christ alone, which they that do works, and not from Christ
within, and his Light within, are in the deeds of darkness, and
self-righteousness, wherein the mystery of iniquity works, to darken the
grace of God, and to make void the sufferings of Christ, and the Kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, within, the obedience thereof makes free
from sin, and so obtains the blessing; and this of faith and not of works,
though the blind sees it not, who are in their own works and litteral
performances; such know little of the power of faith, or the work of
righteousness, whereby man is created new in the good works to walk, which are
foreordained, and to such the everlasting righteousness is brought in, by
which the transgression is finished.

Qu. 12. Whether the Light that is in every man does reveal Jesus Christ as
crucifified for sin and risen again? if so, How came it to pass that so many
strict men amongst the philosophers, and Paul himself walking according to his
conscience before conversion, were ignorant of him?

Answ. Though the Light of Christ that lights every man that comes into the
world, yet it reveals Christ only in such as believe and follow it out of the
world, in which Christ is not revealed, neither can be, for the world by
wisdom knows him not: And the reason why Christ crucified for sin and risen
again was not revealed to the Philosophers, and to Saul, is the same in your
selves in this age, who some of you run from a blind zeal in the Letter, others
in wild notions, all from your imaginations without the Light of Christ, so
none in that state knows Christ as you ought to do, who have him not revealed
within, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy, and it is the
spirit of truth that guides into all truth, and that which testifies of Jesus
as the truth is in him, which all that have not that knowledge from the spirit,
are ignorant of him, and so takes that for the Light of the conscience, which
is but your own thoughts and imaginations, and so far unlike to reveal Jesus:
And Saul was as learned in the Letter, and as zealous for that which he
imagined to be the meaning of it, as you are, and yet blind as to the light in
the conscience, his mad zeal leading him against the pricks, as many of you now
are, and might see a taste thereof, did you mind the light you are opposing.

Qu. 13 Whether you have not amongst you many, who presume to be Masters, or
masterly Teachers, contrary to that word of Christ, Mat. 23.10. in the true
intent of it? Do they not usurp authority over the judgment and conscience of
their followers, requiring them to believe and obey what they say, without
asking their meaning, and examining their sayings by the scriptures? whereas
Christ expounded his sayings, as occasion were offered, and need required, to
his Disciples, and the Bereans are commended for searching the Scriptures
daily, whether the things spoke by the Apostles were so, Mat. 13.18, 19.36,
37, etc.

Ans. This Quaerie is utterly made up of a ly; therefore I return it back into
the slanderous bottle from whence it came; for against the whole Quaerie we are
witnesses, and the practice of Christ is owned, (who is the Lord of the
conscience) the one Teacher, whereby Masterly Teachers are denied.

Qu. 14. Whether it be not high presumption and spiritual pride, for some
amongst you to break Christ's Commands, and teach men so, and to judge (as many
do) the secrets of men's hearts, and rashly without knowledge of men's
conversations, to affirm that they have not the spirit? If the spirit of God
witness with their Spirits (as I doubt not but it does with diverse of them you
so judge) that they have the Spirit of God, and the work of regeneration
witnessing thereunto, may they not by your bold judgment to the contrary know
how to judge of you?

Ans. The Spirit of Christ where it is, knows it own, neither does it judge
by outward appearance, nor yet without knowledge, by which the Saints have
judged the hearts of others, which they knew not themselves, and that spirit is
witnessed; but what spirit is that in thee, which accuses some amongst us to
break Christ's commands and teach men so; not making it appear who they are, and
under that pretense would limit the Spirit of the Lord not to judge where it
is: This shows little of the work of regeneration, or the Spirits witness,
but as one afraid that deceit should be discovered, and so would exclude all
judging; where shall Christ judge, if not in his Saints? which judgment the
blind generation could never own, and yet would be judging others of that
whereof thy self art guilty, as thy book does manifest, by which all may know
how to judge of thee.

Qu. 15. Whether do you not esteem the sayings of some amongst you, of equal
authority with the sayings of God in Scripture; and as readily, or more to be
believed, and obeyed, without any enquiry, whether they agree with Scripture or
no; even although they plainly contradict the written word? Is it not an usual
things with many of you to travel up and down to and fro, far and near to the
wearying of your flesh, and neglecting your relations, in obedience to such
voices or sayings not warranted by Scripture, but contrary thereunto, yet in
many things of this kind, wherein some of you seem to glory, the Papists
themselves outstrip you, only they are more modest then to go naked; and who
has required these things of any of you?

Query 16.

Whether Satan that old Deceiver (who often changes his shapes being discovered
in many of his old devices) may not now be expected to come in his best dress,
as an Angel of Light, and being discovered in his old Antichristian forms, and
in rude ranting, now to come with power, and seeming parity, shewing-signs and
wonders, to seduce from the plain simplicity of the Gospel of Christ,
according to those descriptions of his coming and working, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9.
Mar. 13.22. 2 Cor. 11.3.14. and if so, ought not all men to take heed how they
believe every spirit or powerful motion to be of God? as also how they hear and
follow every Prophet that comes in Sheeps clothing and pretends to come with
light? And are not those in the way to be easily seduced who are so taken with
the fair covering and outside-carriage of persons, as to embrace their
principles without a serious, spiritual Scripture trial of them? Whereas we
are commanded, if any man bring not this Doctrine receive him not, 2 John 10.
And Solomon says, The simple believes every word, but the prudent man looks
well to his goings, Proverbs 14.15.

Answ. The Word of God in whom ever it is spoken, is of equal authority to the
end for which it goes forth, and he is the same that ever he was, in whom he
is according to their measures: but that we esteem any of our sayings with
equal authority with the sayings of God, is false, and it is thy self, whose
saying agrees not with Scripture, who art telling of a written Word; and do
not thou show thy envy against the authority of Christ and those that obey him,
who would slander traveling up and down far and near, to the wearying of the
flesh, at the obedience of the voice of the Lord, and this thou slanders with
neglecting relations, and to be contrary to the Scriptures; have thou not here
sufficiently showed thy blindness, as touching both spirit and letter? Is it
contrary to the Scripture to leave all and follow Christ? Or was there ever a
Disciple of his that did not? Or can such be his Disciples who does not? How
has thy imaginations blinded thee? stop thy mouth for shame; art thou talking
of following the Lamb, who wilt neither do it thy self, nor suffer others: Did
not the Ministers of Christ make proof of themselves, in wandering in
necessities, in distresses, afflictions, watchings, fastings, tumults and
imprisonments: Did they not wander to and fro in hunger and nakedness, having
no certain dwelling place; Is this now become contrary to the Scriptures with
thee; And have not the Prophets of the Lord been caused to strip themselves
naked, as signs to the wicked genrations; And do thou now prefer the Papists
before this: And do thou charge the Servants of the Lord to glory in this;
Could thou glory in it thy self, to leave all and suffer these things for the
name of Christ; it is much easier with the flesh to sit still in thy
habitation, and accuse them that do; the Papists and thee suit well in this, in
your wil-shorship, but little knows either of you what it is to be guideded
contrary to your wills, by the Spirit of God; you are none of those children
who are for signs and wonders; Is this the end of your pulling off your pride
of Apparel, thereby to take advantage to strike at the whole obedience to
Christ in greater things, and say they are contrary to the Scriptures, which
the Scriptures do witness against you? Is not this the old Deceiver thou art
telling of, who is changing your shape, and now dressing you without Ribbans,
who formerly was dressing you up with them in your rude ranting, and is now
coming in a seeming purity, but with more mischief against the simplicity of
the Gospel, and all those are in the way to be easily seduced, who are so soon
taken with your fair covering and outside-carriage, but they that have the
light in them, and that spirit that tries all things, will not own you the
sooner for your feigned humility with all this poison at the bottom, but if
you will be owned with the Children of Light, who judges not according to the
outward appearance, then must you own that which washes the inside, that the
old leaven and venom of the Serpent may be purged out, that old Accuser of the
Brethren, who yet sits in the Temple of God, pleading for his Kingdom of sin
and imperfection, and against the obedience to Christ in them that follow him;
yea, against the living obedience of those from whom he has taken up the
imitation, by which he makes a fair show in the flesh, glorying in appearance
but not in the heart, and therefore strikes at the Light within, and the
spirit of truth there, that if by any means he may keep the heart though he
loose the Ribbans, and so make a boast of an outside.

And thou ask another question in thy book, whether this People (meaning the
Quakers witnessing against pride) standing up to plead for the Spirit, and also
for reforming in habit, and some other good things at this time, may not have
in it a design of Satan, to bring up an evil report upon those good things, and
the persons that practice and seek to promote them; may we not (say thou)
look at this as a stumbling block cast in the way to hinder this good work, by
the enemy of man, who leaves no way unattempred to stir up the minds of men to
prejudice against truth. I say, if pleading for the Spirit, reforming in habit,
and other good things, be good things, as thou say they are, (which the
Quakers plead for, and practice at this time) then out of thine own mouth be
thou judged, that thou art he that is in that design of Satan, to bring up an
evil report upon those good things, and the persons that practice and seek to
promote them, and this is the way thou art attempting, to stir up the minds of
men to prejudice against the truth; may not all see, that some of you who are
called, Anabaptists, who of late have been provoked to cast off some of your
pride. (outwardly) by those you call Quakers, being you could not maintain it
with Scripture, now are you preaching down pride of envy, against their
persons, who have testified against it in you, as well as in the rest of the
World, (yet however we rejoice, that pride is preached down) which though you
had the Scriptures before, yet could not be provoked by them thereto, but have
been the Ringleaders of Pride, of all-seeming religious People in the Nation:
And this I say to thee, and the rest of you, who are making a fair show in the
flesh, and would glory in appearance, thereby to despise the Quakers, you have
a great deal more to deny besides putting off your outward pride in apparel; if
you will either imitate the Quakers or answer the Scriptures, and the practice
of the Saints therein recorded: Is there not the same ground in Scripture to
deny respect of persons, and cease worshipping one another, and to hold fast
the form of sound words, without respect of persons, not to give flattering
titles to men, whereby the proud is exalted, and the poor despised? does not
this arise from the same ground with pride in apparel, and bring forth the same
effects, which they that have observed the command of Christ and his Apostles
have ever avoided? Is not the same that commanded his Ministers to go teach all
Nations, whereupon they went into the Synagogues and Idol-Temple to cry down
their false worship and to call out of them? And did not they preach the Gospel
in streets and Markets? Was not they beat in the Synagogues and halled before
Rulers? Was they not wanderers to and fro, having no certain dwelling place? Is
there not the same command to sue no man at the Law, but if any man take away
thy Cloak let him have thy Coat also? Take no thought for the morrow; give to
him that asks, and lend, asking nothing again; and much more such like plain
commands in Scipture, which might be mentioned, were not the Cross too great
for you to imitate, which you ought to do and teach to others to observe; till
then cease your boasting and glorying in outward appearance: And could you do
all this and much more by imitation, and not in obedience to the Light, and by
the power of the spirit; in the day of account it will but be found
self-righteousness, when inquiry shall be made, Who has required these things
at your hands? So to the Light of Christ turn your minds, which will let you
see the seat of presumption upon a feigned humility and will worship, which
finds no acceptance with God, neither will it carry through the whole
obedience, but puffs up the mind for one thing, in a self-exaltation and
despising of others; and as to the Light of Christ you keep your minds, you
will come to see that, that which condemns one sin condemns all; and that which
leads into one truth leads into all truth, and gives power to walk therein:
So the Ministration of the spirit gives life, which keeps down the boaster,
but the litteral knowledge puffs up and so kills; so the Law of the spirit of
life, which is in Christ Jesus, makes free from the Law of sin and death to
those that walk in Spirit. If you can receive this you may, and let the Light
in all your consciences answer thereto, which shall witness me, when the book is
opened, a lover of your souls.

James Nayler.

FINIS.

