THE LAST NEVVES FROM THE Prince of Wales: DECLARING His further proceedings
against the ParParliaments Forces, and Captain BATTENS joining with his
Highness, with 5000. men from Holland. And another great and bloody fight
between his Highnesses forces, and the Parliaments; with the number killed and
taken, the manner of the Fight, and how the Princes Foot routed Col. Rich his
Horse, and put them to a disorderly Retreat, by throwing Wildfire, and
Grenades amongst them, which they carried on the end of their Pikes.

Also, the firing of the Guards belonging to the Parliaments Forces by the
Princes Foot, and above 100. slain upon the place near Deal Towns-end.
Likewise, a discovery of the Resolution of diverse of the Inhabitants of
Sandwich, to rise for the King, with Spades, Mattocks, Felling-Axes, Spits, and
Pitchforks, to beat out the Parliaments Forces, and to seize on the Town for
the Prince.

LONDON, Printed ANNO DOM. 1648.

JOYFUL NEVVES FROM THE Prince of Wales, AND A GREAT FIGHT BETWEEN His
Highnesses Forces, and the Parliaments, since the late Overthrow, Captai^.
Batters joining with his Highness with 5000. men, etc.
SIR.
MY kind love presented to you, etc. I would not have you think that I any way
neglected the performance of what promised but the truth is, I had the last
week writ to you, but could not tell how to send it, which I was very sorry for.
The news now is, the Ships or diverse of them have attempted to fetch water by
their Boats in the Isle of Thanet, but as yet could not, and have been beaten
back again, upon which they have threatened to shoute down Marget, we understand
that Captain Batten is come with 6. Sail of Ships from Holland, and that there
cannot be less then 5000. men abord the ships, The last Thursday morning the
enemy sallied out of Sandown Castle upon our Guard, who not being many
retreated some sm^ll matter from the house where they kept Guard, so that the
enemy possessed themselves of the house a while, and after fired it, after this
our forces (being very inconsiderable) drew up and charged them, but the
dispute held not long, the enemy ran away and made what have they could into
the Castle, which our horse, there then upon the Guard seeing, pursued them,
and wounded most of them, have taken and killed above 20. with the loss of one
Trooper, and one Foot, as also 6. or 7. wounded, which we hope will do well,
they have been very quiet ever since for ought we see, it is certainly known
by a Drummer that came out of the Castle that day, that the man that fired the
house then, and he that fired the new house of Sir Math: Mennis a fortnight
since, were both killed this time, and it is further reported by a woman that
was in a house near the place where they fought, that some of the enemy as they
ran away said one to another, who would have thought the rogues would have
fought so, after which skirmish the Ships landed about 300. men, and with them
3. Colors, who kept a while by the Sea side, and after took their Boats, and
went aboard again, The last Saturday there came about 20. out of the Castle,
but when there was a party dr^wn to fight, they retreated and ran all into the
Castle; this day being Monday, we had intelligence by two men that came out of
the Ships last night, there was near 600. landed, most Seamen, and did intend
to fall on the leagure about 12. a Clock, which they did accordingly, but came
short off, there was near 700. of the enemy engaged and came to Deal Towns
end, and had a hot dispute, near 400. slain, wounded, and taken prisoners;
whereof Sir John Boys is one who is shot as most of them are, I do believe that
you will hear more fully suddenly from Col. Rich.

Sandwich Aug. 19. 1648. I remain, yours to use P. N.


Upon Friday morning last, being the 18. of this instant, about 5. a Clock in
the morning, the enemy made another sally, which allarmed our men, their number
consisted of 400. 200. being Seamen, who had 4. Colors which they brought from
aboard the Princes Ship, with this Motto, For Religion, King, and Kingdom, and
making their approach near our Guards, our Musketeers fired, they answered them
ag^in; but the enemy coming on so fast, and such fury, our men were forced to
quit two Guards, the Princes forces set fire on them, and pursued our men;
whereupon, the horse having received this Allarm, immediately mounted, and
advanced toward the said forces; the enemies foot attended their motion, and
prepared to receive them, who upon the end of each Pike, had a Ball of
Wildfire fastened thereunto, each Pikeman having his match lighted, ready to
fire, and upon the advance of our horse to charge them, they displayed their
Balls of Wildfire, which much amazed our men; insomuch, that they were put to
a very disorderly retreat, the enemy pursuing not, our horse rallied, but
before they could gain their lost ground, to make good their Charge, they were
retreated into the Castle; they pursued within a quarter of a mile of the
Castle. In this action we lost 9. men, and some wounded, the Enemies number is
not known. We have lately received advertisements from the Downs, that a great
accident has befallen his Highness the P. of Wales, by Gunpowder, and
endangered the loss of both his eyes, but (praised be God) there is great
hopes of his recovery.

SJR,
MY kind love salute you etc. I have received your letter, for the which I give
you many thanks, Sir Michael Liuesey thanks you for your care in the delivery
of his letters. Now for Intelligence, I wish I had more to furnish you with,
then now I have, but I desire you to take notice, that here has been a wicked
D^sign and Pl^t discovered of some that should have betrayed this Town t^ the
enemy, viz. That they should rise one night about ^^. of the Clock, whether the
time be past or yet to come, it is not known, (but I hope they are dismissed of
their intentions) with Shovells, Spades, Mattocks Felling-Axes, Spits,
Pitchforks, and such other hellish Instruments, to have cut off some of the
Guards, and to have let an enemy in, and for to have seized on the Town for the
King, (as said) all which one William Clark a Mason of this Town, related to
one who he supposed to be his Friend, by whose means it came to light, and
Clark is imprisoned about it, I doubt not but God in his due time will bring it
further to light, and frustrate the intentions and plottings of such as would
destry his people, The reason I have not other news to furnish you with is,
for that Sir Michael Liuesey has been from Sandwich from Monday to Saturday
last week, The Revolted Ships are yet in the Downs, and stay all Vessels that
come near, The Castles hold out still, but its confidently reported, Deal
Castle will be suddenly surrendered, for it is said, there are many sick in it,
and the Grenades make work amongst them, the surrendering of which, as also of
the other, is much wished.

Sandwich the 19. of Aug. 1648. Your Servant P. N,


The last News from the two Armies of England and Scotland, communicating the
near engagement of both Armies, and the Resolution and proceedings of the Scots.
To their honored friends the Committee of the County of Lanc^ster, now at
Manchester, these.
Gentlemen.
IN ours to Sir Richard Hoghton we gave you a short Character of the Scots Army
now quartered all along the borders of our County, both on the Lancashire and
Westmerland fide, Truly what we said of them yesterday was but the expressing
their Delineaments of Hercules by the foot; We spare to spoke the worst of
them, least we should forfeit that cresence you have toward us, and not be
believed; but assure your selves, they by their daily incursions into our poor
Country, between this and their quarters have left nothing in all the World
that is portable.

In diverse places some whole families have not left them wherewith to subsist a
day, but are glad ^o come hither for mere subsistence, they have taken forth of
di^ers fami^i^^ all, the very rackencrocks and pothooks; they have d^^ven away
all the Beasts, Sheep and Horses in diverse Townships, all without redem^tion
save some poor milch-kine: They tell the people they must have their houses
too, and we verily believe it must be so, because Duke Hamilton has told them
it should be so, Their usage of some women is extremely abominable, and of men
very barberous, wherein we apprehend, nevertheless something of Gods Justice
toward very many, who have abundantly desired and rejoiced at their advance
hither: Old extreme Cavaliers, whom they have most oppressed in their acts of
violence and plunder to our great admiration.

They rail without measure against our Ministers, and threaten the destruction
of so many as they can get; many Cavaliers have sent into Furness, and Cartmel
to Sir Thomas Tilsley for Protections, but the Scots weigh not their
pro^ections a rush, and Tilsley himself tells the Cavaliers he can do them no
good, but wishes them to use their best shifts in putting their goods out of
the way; they say they will not leave the County worth any thing: they make no
account of Lambert, they say he is run away: They are yet in quarters at
Burton, Kirby, Whittington, etc. and the English at Encross and Furness; they
have driven away above 600 Cattle, and above 1500 sheep they have given such
earnest of their conditions that the Country have wholly driven away their
cattle of all sorts toward Yorkshire, and the bottom of Lancashire; forty
great droves at least are gone from us, and through this Town this day. But we
hope this sad distraction will shortly clear up by the timely conjunction of
our forces, and by the cheerful rising of our Country; whereof we are assured
they never stood in half so much need, for all the sufferings they have
endured. We pray you let us know the business of the North and we shall give
you an account of what we daily learn, concerning the enemies motion or design,
wherein we shall desire to be,

Lan. 17. Aug. 1648. Your most assured and ready friends to serve you Hen.
Porter. W. West



FINIS.

