THE SCARLET GOWN, Or the HISTORY Of all the present CARDINALS OF ROME.

Wherein is set forth the LIFE, BIRTH, Interest, Possibility, rich Offices,
Dignities, and charges of every Cardinal now living.

Also their Merits, Virtues, and Vices; Together with the carriage of the POPE
and Court of ROME.

Written originally in Italian, and translated into English by H. C. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

cardinal in habit

A CARDINAL in his HABIT as he sitts in the CONSISTORY.

J. Cross Sculpsit.

To the Right Honorable, and every way Noble Lord, John EARL OF RVTLAND, Lord
Rosse of Hamlake, Trusbut and Belvoire.
My LORD,
THis small Treatise, which I have presumed to recommend unto the world under
your Honors Patronage, besides the noveltie of the subject, so little, or not
at all touched upon in any Book, at leastwise that I have seen, speaking our
Tongue, cannot be but well received, as I conceive, by all such as any way
pretend to the knowledge of foreign affairs, both for that it treates of so
principal and active a body and society of men, as that of the College of
Cadinalls, Princes Fellows, as they are reputed, and the great Council, and
Consistory of that mysterious Head, the Pope of Rome; as also because it
discovers many particularities of the practique as well in the elections of the
said Cardinals, as likewise of their several interests, and hopes they may
conceive to themselves of arriving one day at Peter's Chair; and also what kind
of Pope each of them is like to prove, in case he should attain to that
honor. Moreover I make no question but that it will be a very pleasing thing
to most men, to have such a lively character by them, as my Author bear gives,
of every one of those Archpoliticians, and Counselors, who have such an
influence into all the debates and results of that pragmatique Superintendent
Court, and Consistory: which Lords and Laws it, or would willingly do so,
over the whole world. Of no less satisfaction too, suppose I, it will be to
see so clearly chalked out all the several applications of all the Popish
Princes and States, especially of the two great Kings of France and Spain, by
their Ministers, ever Ledger about this Court, to the most politic, and
powerful of these Cardinals; out-vying each other in the offer of pensions, or
indeavoring by the gift of spiritual dignities and preferments unto them, to
insure and engage them as much as possible they may, to the espousing the
interests of that Crown, for which they serve; and yet what poor hold
notwithstanding, either of these Princes has of them; and how apt they are
upon very slight motives to range themselves on the quite contrary faction, is
a matter not unworthy of observation. These and several other Remarques
touching the now Cardinals, the Pope at this day regnant, and his particular
family, are presented in this little Tract, which, I would willingly make my
self believe, will be as delightful to the judicious, as it was pleasing to
me in the translating thereof. As for common and perfunctory Readers, I shall
say as Antimachus Clarius said, when in the very interim, as he was reciting a
piece which he had made, all but Plato left him, unus mihi Plato instar
multorum; for, so as your Honor be pleased to approve of, and favorablely
receive it, the pains I have taken therein are abundantly satisfied, what
reception soever it may find of others; as having attained the maine end I
proposed to my self in the publishing of it; which was, that it might be as
acceptable to your Lordship, as it is heartily desired it should be, by him,
who in all himble affection is,

My Lord, Your Honors most devoted Servant Henry Cogan.

THE JUST WEIGHT OF THE Scarlet Gowns.
I. Giovanni Carlo de Medici.
THE Prince Giovanni Carlo de Medici is Brother to the great Duke of Toscan,
and Nephew to the Cardinal Carlo de Med ci, at this day called the Cardinal of
Toscan. He was promoted by Innocent the tenth in the first Promotion, together
with his Holiness Nephew, at the instance of the great Duke, and the Cardinal
aforesaid. He is a Prince of no mean Understanding, and an expert Soldier, but
more at Sea than on Land, because he was for some time employed in the charge
of Generalissimo at Sea, commanding the Catholic Fleets; for which cause he
always has been, and will be, most devoted to the House of Austria; besides
the open profession all his House makes thereof, which live under the
protection of that Crown. He is a jovial Lord, and loves Women a little too
much. He is by nature Covetous, nothing Bountiful, but rather Niggardly. All
the House of Medici is no great friend of the Family of the Barbarini, for
diverse public, and private causes, and in particular for the War made with
those Princes, to all the world known.

II. Domenico Cecchini.
DOmenico Cecchini, a Roman Gentleman, about fifty three years of age: He has
been long a Prelate, and always held good correspondence with the Cardinal
Pamphilio, who coming to be Pope promoted him jointly, though he did not name
him in the first Promotion; but he was the first named in the second. Before he
was Cardinal, his Holiness conferred upon him the charge of Datarie
Apostolical; an Office verily of great profit, which he exercises still now
that he is Cardinal. He is a Learned man, and well verst in the matters of the
Court. It is said, that this Cardinal was promoted by his Holiness, to gratify
him for some services he had done him in diverse occurrences, and particularly
in the suit depending between the Marquess Giustiniano, and his Father; for
that he had twice pronounced Sentence in favor of the Marquess, Nephew to his
Holiness; besides several other causes, for which he merited the Popes grace.
This personage is old, but not enough for the Papacy. He is a man Affable,
Prudent, and repleat with Virtuous qualities. In the time of his Prelateship he
was always accounted Just, no notable defect being known in him. When he was
young he took some recreation, but without scandal; howbeit now that he is
Cardinal, he shows himself more lascivious, although he thinks his secrets and
intelligences are not penetrated into, whilst he is very much pleased with
women. He pretends enough unto the Papacy, is well looked upon in the Court,
being loved, and reverenced of all, and maintains himself neutral.

III. Nicolo Albergati.
NIcolo Albergati of the Bolognese Nobility, forty years of age: He was
Archbishop of Bologna, which dignity was resigned unto him in the beginning of
the Papacy of Innocent the tenth by the Cardinal Colonna, being so charged with
Pensions, that of the great Revenues of that Church the poor Lord could hardly
receive two thousand Crowns a year. The Prince Lodovisio, who took to Wife the
Popes Niepce, was desirous to have a Cardinal in his House for the new raising
up the memory of his decayed Family; but because he had no Brothers, nor other
Kinsmen, he besought his Holiness to grant him the grace to make the said
Nicolo Albergati, his Cosen by a Feminine line, Cardinal, and with a Brieve
declare him Brother to his Excellency, upon condition that he should call
himself the Cardinal Lodivisio, as accordingly his Holiness vouchsafed to
gratify him. The said Prince is since dead without Heirs, so that the
Lodovisian Family remains extinct. The Cardinal aforesaid is very poor, and
therefore is now relieved, and lodged, as the Prince's Brother, in his house.
When as he was going to the residence of his Church, the Pope ordained him to
pass by Florence, with the title of Legate Apostolical, and there in the name of
his Holiness to Christen a Son that was born to the great Duke; in which voyage
he was by him sumptuously entertained, and afterward, at his departure from
that City, he was by his Highness presented with very fair, and rich Hangings
of Tapestry; and his servants also with great gifts; but when his Eminency
would in some sort have recompensed the same to his Highness Courtiers, they
were expressly forbidden by him from taking of any thing. This Cardinal is of
great understanding, rarely qualified, and of an holy conversation, never
omitting any Function which is to be performed by him in his Church; and being
of an Exemplary life, he is much esteeemed of by all the City. I am persuaded,
that he will continually maintain himself in that conceit, which he has at
this present, that at length he may become Pope; and that happning, he would
make the Church happy. He is affected to the Crown of Spain, for that the
Prince Lodovisio was much interessed with that Majesty, in regard all his
Estate lay in the Kingdom of Naples. The French will much oppose him for
diverse respects; the chief are, because he is of the Spanish Faction; and that
which is of greater consequence, for that the said French have deprived the
Prince Lodovisio his Brother, of the Principality of Piombino, which his
Excellency bought of King Philip the fourth for the sum of five hundred
thousand Crowns; and now it is said, that they will confer it on the Father of
the Cardinal Mazarino.

IV. Horatio Ginstiniano.
HOratio Giustiniano, seventy years of age, and Father of the Congregation of
the Lord Philippo Neri: He is by birth a Genouese, and Cosen to the deceased
Marquess, Giustiniano, whom he persuaded to make the present Prince his heir,
at such time as he served him in the place of his Chamberlain, though he were
far from that Line, seeing the Prince is a native of Sicilia, and the deceased
Marquess was a Genouese. In the beginning of the Papacy of Innocent the tenth,
it was held for an undoubted matter of every one, that the Prince would demand
the Scarlet Gown, either for his Father, or his Brother; howbeit they were not
only not promoted, but by an Order, ore tenus, of his Holiness, they were
banished from Rome, with a Declaration that they should return into Sicilia,
their country: And what was the occasion of these motives could not be truly
penetrated into; but for so much as I can understand, it was, because the
Father of the said Prince having co^menced a suit against his Son, upon
pretense that he was to administer the goods which the Marquess had left behind
him, against the will of his Holiness, who, in the time when he was Cardinal,
had with reiterated instances prayed him to desist from his pretension, but
with much arrogance he went peevishly on in his obstinate purpose. The Prince,
as it is said, out of his gratitude to his benefactors, demanded the Scarlet
Gown for Giustiniano, who had besides been an intimate friend of his Holiness
whilst he was Cardinal. He is a man old in years, of good conversation, affable
of access, and of an exemplary life, but of mean understanding, and pretends
not much to the Papacy; wherefore he declares not himself of any Faction,
remaining independent and neutral. He seldom cuts his Beard, it may be for that
he would seem older than he is. He is a poor Cardinal, having nothing else,
than that his poor Patrimony, which he enjoyes in his Congregation, and what he
comes to be supplied with by his Holiness. He is Bishop of Nocera in Umbria. He
would not be any good Pope, either for the poor, or for the people, since, as a
Genouese, he would increase Taxes and Impositions. This Cardinal is not much
favored in the sacred College; and although he shows himself neutral, yet is
he inwardly much devoted to the Catholic King, but outwardly is French. Our
holy Father has declared him grand Penitentiary.

V. Cibo.
CIbo, thirty five years of age: He was a Prelate, and Son to the Prince of
Massa and Canara, and as soon as the Cardinal Pamphilio was made Pope, his
Holiness declared him Steward of the Apostolical Palace; and because the said
Cibo his Palace was near unto that of his Holiness, he made him a liberal tender
thereof, to the end he might enlarge it with his, but the Pope refused to
accept of it as a gift, but took it by way of sale; the rather, because that
Palace was subject to a strict Feoffment in trust. The said Cibo held great
correspondence of friendship and confidence with the abovesaid Pamphilio, who
knowing his merit, did in contemplation of Innocent the eighth, of the most
noble Family of the Ciboes in Genoua, that was the original of the greatness of
the Pamphilian. House, by exalting that Family unto Ecclesiastical dignities
and Prelatures, promote him the said Cibo to the Scarlet Gown; and for that
cause also took upon him the name of Innocent the tenth. This young Cardinal is
of much integrity, virtue, and goodness of life. He has in all the time of his
Prelateship always imitated the behavior and carriage of the Cardinal
Pamphilio, retiring himself not only from universal commerce, but also from
that of Prelates, except it be in urgent occasions. He is by nature Studious,
and little given to Mirth, but is much delighted with hearing of Music. He is
devoted to the House of Austria, for that his Progenitors lived under the
protection of that Crown. He is loved, and well regarded, as well by the Pope,
as by all the sacred College. He pretends enough to the Papacy, for which end,
it is believed, he lives so retired.

VI. Pier Luigi Caraffa.
PIer Luigi Caraffa was by Urban the eighth made Bishop of Tricario in Rego;
and afterward by the same Pope sent Nuntio into Germany, and to Liege in
Elanders; at which time Sachetti, the Bishop of Gravina, was by him also sent
into Spain, with a purpose to promote both of them to the Scarlet Gown; but at
the instance of the Colonnesi, Caraffa remained excluded, Sachetti being only
promoted: And after he had abode a long time in that his employment of Nuntio
he was recalled to the Court, where the poor Lord thought to receive the due
reward of his labors; And being arrived at Rome, after his continuance there
some weeks, he resolved cunningly to try his fortune, by craving leave, as he
did, to go unto his Residence, to the end that by the answer the Pope should
give him, he might conjecture what his good, or bad disposition was toward
him, and so might afterward direct his life accordingly: But Urban, not only
gave him his benediction with both hands, but(...) said unto him, My Lord, go
the more cheerfully, because we will not forget your deserts; Which Caraffa
hearing, absented himself from the Court, and arriving at his Residence, he
never went from it, until his Holiness, after some ten or eleven years past of
his Papacy, caused him to be called to the Court in the year 1642. so as all
the world was persuaded, that it was to promote him unto the Scarlet Gown; but
being arrived there, it was published, that he was come to visit the Temple of
the Apostles; and not called by his Holiness; and the occasion thereof was,
because the Colonnesi, foreseeing that the Scarlet Gown was designed for him,
upon his arrival, returned anew to press the Pope, that he should not promote
him; and among the rest Donna Anna Barbarina, Wife to Don Tadeo, went unto him,
and with reiterated prayers, and much weeping, persuaded Urban not to make him
Cardinal, as indeed he did not. But Urban himself repented him of it, for he
was heard one day to utter these precise words, God forgive him, who was the
cause, that I did not make Pier Luigi Caraffa Cardinal; and this he said many
times, according to report: howsoever he was fain to go away from Rome, as he
came: but Innocent the tenth, when as in the second Promotion he promoted his
Nephew, gave him the Scarlet Gown, because he knew him worthy of that dignity;
and Caraffa himself expected it from his hands, as soon as he heard of his
Holiness assumption to the Papacy; for he well remembered these words which he
spoke to him, when as in the time of Urban he was departing toward the
Residence of his Church; My Lord, it grieves me much, that your Lordship goes
from Court with so little satisfaction, not having received the deserved reward
of your labors. Unto whom Caraffa answered, I will pray our Lord God, that he
will make me worthy to receive it from your hands; to this Pamphilio replied, I
have no such pretension, but be assured if it should happen to be so, you shall
be one of the first I will think upon; as indeed it fell out; for after the
promotion of his Nephew, he was the next that he gave the Hat unto, being at
that time in his bishopric of Tricaria: and besides his Merits, there was a
certain obligation of kindred between them; for whilst Innocent was a Prelate,
and Nuntio at Naples, having brought along with him thither all his Family,
together with his brother and his wife, his Nephew, called Camillo Pamphilio,
the now Husband of the Princess Rossano, was born in the said city of Naples,
and the Prince Don Tiberio Caraffa, this Cardinals brother, was his Godfather.
This person is most deserving, both for his own good qualities, and the
services he has done to the Apostolic Sea. He is exceeding well verst in all
matters of the Consistories and Congregations; his Votes are held in great
esteem, and the Pope makes much account of him; so does the sacred College, and
every one else. He is a man of approved goodness of life, and has always
shunned conversations for the avoiding of scandals; he seeks, as much as may
be, to live retired, devoutly reverencing God, and making all his Family to do
the like; and it is held for certain, by them which know him, that he is still
a Virgin. This Cardinal has in the sacred College no Enemies, either secret or
open, unless it be the Colonnesi, who, as before, would not have had him
Cardinal, so do they not now for certain desire he should rise to the Papacy,
but will use all their force and power to keep him from it. He would be a good
Pope, for the benefit, not only of the Roman Church, but of all Christendom.
He has many, and diverse Nephews, but the most beloved, and nearest to him, are
the Sons of the Count Celano, of the House of Piccolomini; and those of the
Marquess of Anse: Howbeit if ever he should come to be Pope, Teatino would be
the reigning Cardinal, unto whom he has resigned the Bishopric of Tricario; a
man Learned, of good Life, and great Authority. The Prince of Bisignano, Don
Tiberio Caraffa, his Brother, is Knight of the Golden-Fleece. He is courteous,
affable, of an exemplary life, and very charitable, so that for his noble
qualities he is well looked upon, and universally beloved of all the City of
Naples, which calls him Pater Patriae, for that he favors the poor so much.

VII. Federico Sforza.
FEderico Sforza, four and forty years of age, a Roman Nobleman, and Brother to
the Duke of that Surname. He was a Prelate in the College of the participating
Protonotaries in the time of Urban, and had no other employment than to be
Vice-Legat in Avignon, being sent thither by the Cardinal Antonio the Legate,
with an intent to promote him also to the Cardinalship, but it did not follow
for some private interests. Innocent the tenth, for that he would not see a
House so renowned, and so well affected unto him, to be without the Scarlet
Gown, made him Cardinal. He is a man of good understanding, but not very rich,
and therefore somewhat miserable. His Holiness after the flight of the Cardinal
Antonio made him Vicechamberlain of the holy Church. He is a jovial Lord, loves
Comedies and Feasts; and in particular when he was a Prelate, he delighted much
in company. His Inclination is French for two reasons; the first, because he
was Vice-Legat at Avignon; and the second, for that there is continually seen
in his Palace great store of French; but he seems to be neutral, except it be
for the Pope: Others say, that he will become Spanish, in regard of the feudes,
and estates, which Duke Sforza, his brother, possesses in the State of Milan;
being lately too left heir of many Gastles by the death of a Milanese Lord, his
Kinsman. He is no great friend of Cardinal Antonio, because he caused him, upon
hope of making him Cardinal; to sell him at a very low rate the Palace of
Sforza's Court, since called Cardinal Antonio's; but being afterward given by
the said Antonio to the Queen of France, it is now named the Royal Palace,
where the Ambassador of the most Christian King resides; and where also the
Princes and Lords that come out of France do usually lodge.

VIII. Tiberio Cenci.
TIberio Cenci, a Roman, fifty five years old; he was a Bishop, and promoted to
the Scarlet Gown at the instance of the Prince Borghese, Nephew to Paul the
fifth, as the nearest of his Kinsmen that was capable of that dignity, for that
there was none other of the house of Borghese which was fit, and of age to
receive the Hat. He was poor, and therefore was assisted with a good sum of
money by the said Prince, who offered him for his habitation the lodgings of
the Cardinal Borghese in his own Palace; but he was thanked by Cenci, without
accepting thereof, saying, that he would make use of his favor upon occasion;
nevertheless the said Prince bestowed on him several suits of Tapestry
hangings, and furnitures for chambers. The said Cenci is Nephew to Cardinal
Lanti, in whose house he remained some time after he had reeeived the Scarlet
Gown, but now he is removed into the house where Cardinal Pio dwelt, in the
Cesarinies street. He is a person capable of being Pope, of some value, and
well looked upon by the Court, but he is of no credit with the Princes, though
he be a good man, as having been a long time exercised in the Congregation of
the Lord Philippo Neri in the new Church. He has no defect in him, and if he
should live to a Conclave, he might likewise pretend to the Papacy, and the
great Duke of Toscan would aid him much, in regard he is the Kinsman of his
Kinsmen; but I am persuaded, that whosoever shall go about to raise him, will
labor in vain, for that the memory is yet fresh of that cruel and infamous
success happening unto the House of the Cenci, which I will not leave
unrecounted. There were three children of the said House, one Daughter and two
Sons, most noble Romans: whose Father being very rich, and well stricken in
years, was so wretchedly covetous that he would allow his Sons in a manner
nothing, nor marry his Daughter; who for her beauty was much desired, and sued
unto by the best Nobility of Rome, because he would not part with money. This
old man too was somewhat cracked brained, so that he would oftentimes play many
odd pranks; in regard whereof the Daughter one day calling her Nurse, said
unto her, that they should do well to take her Father, and throw him out of
the window, for so he being dead they should be masters of all. The Nurse,
together with one of the Sons, gave consent to her motion, and having
accordingly put it in execution, they fell a weeping and crying out as soon as
the deed was done, that the old man in one of his frantic fits had cast
himself out of the window. This coming to the ears of the Magistrates, they
were all three, together with the younger Son, committed to prison; and
diligent inquisition being made on the body of the deceased, to see whither by
force he had been thrown out by others, or that he had precipitated himself,
there were signs found sufficient to put the delinquents to torture. Whereupon
being examined, and coming to be racked, the young maid, that was some sixteen
years of age, suddenly confessed ever thing, which being acknowledged by the
other two, they were condemned to death; and afterward being brought to to the
place of execution, the Maid and her Brother were both beheaded; and the other
brother, that was in a manner but a child, and not reputed any way guilty, was
only made to stand under the Scaffold all the while. Now in regard of all
this, I should think it a strange matter that ever this Cardinal should attain
to the Papacy: howsoever he is a man affable, courteous in his dealings, and of
a good disposition. He has not declared himself of any party, but professes
to be neutral.

VI. Benedetto Odeschalco.
BEnedetto Odeschalco, a Nobleman of the City of Milan, 45 years of age; he was
a rich Prelate, and a long time courted Barbarino, out of a desire he had to be
Clerk of the Chamber; which Don Barbarino promised unto him, having to that
effect received the money for it before hand; yet for all that he could never
obtain his intent. But after the death of Urban, he fell to courting the Lady
Olimpia, Sister-in-law to his Holiness, who reigns at this present; and
having diverse times presented her with gifts, he at length got into her favor,
and in particular by an action used by him, which is worthy to be noted; and it
was this. Going one day, about the beginning of the Assumption of Innocent the
tenth, to the house of the said Lady Olimvia, a Goldsmith came and showed her a
Cupbord of very fair Plate to sell; which she having viewed very well, in the
presence of the said Odeschalco, and other Lords, she said, that it was a
curious and goodly Cupbord of Plate, but that she was a poor Widow, and was
not able to buy it; and saying so, past into her chamber. Whereupon Odeschalco
calling the Goldsmith unto him, asked him what the price of it was; and being
agreed, he paid him down eight thousand Crowns for it; then, without saying any
thing else, he sent it in as a present from him to the said Lady Olimpia: who
seeing so noble a gift, was so taken with it, that she went to the Pope, and
begged of him for Odeschalco not only the Clerkship of the Chamber, but
afterward also the Scarlet Gown. This Cardinal is of mean understanding, and
though he has spent much, yet he is rich, splendid, affable in his speech, and
well affected to all the Pamphilian House. Whilst he was a Prelate he was much
given to Sports, Comedies, and Feasts; now he abstains both from common
commerce, and conversation. He is a vassal to the Catholic King, and
therefore will be always of the Austrian Faction, unless it be when his
Country shall change its Master.

Innocent the tenth has in these Promotions created eleven Cardinals, and two
Hats remained vacant; but by the death of the Cardinal Borgia in Spain, of the
Cardinal Capucino in Rome, and also of the Cardinal Farnese, there comes to be
five Hats vacant in the sacred College.

X. Fabritio Savelli.
FAbritio Savelli, a Roman, and the son of Prince Savelli, Ambassacor in this
Court for the Emperors Majesty. He is old in years, having served in the Wars
of Germany with the title of General: He has been oftentimes made a prisoner
by the Switzers, and the last time that he was so, he corrupted his guard, and
fled together with them to Rome; where rewarding them, he gave them a house and
means to live withal. In the time of the War that Urban the eighth waged
against the Princes of Italy, he was declared General of the Army that opposed
the great Duke of Toscan, wherein he carried himself somewhat slackly, for that
he might have damnified the enemy, and did it not; the reason of it was,
because he considered the decrepit age of Urban, and the little time that he
was likely to live; so that he held it no wisdom to make so potent a Prince, as
he was, his enemy; wherefore he was called home from the Camp, and Don Taeo
Barbarino, his Holiness Nephew, was sent thither as Generalissimo. This Family,
both for the Antiquity and Nobility of it, enjoyes diverse prerogatives and
privileges; amongst the which one is, that in the time of the vacancy of the
Apostolic Sea, he keeps the Keys of the Conclave, and may for the guard of
his person raise soldiers at the charge of the Chamber, so far forth as need
shall require: And he may also execute Justice on the lives, not only of
private men, but likewise of those of quality; and in that of Urban the eighth,
he committed to prison certain Registers, that by secret ways carried Letters
into the Conclave to some Cardinals; and, it is said, that he sent them
afterward into the Galleys, having also threatened to hang them: Signior Giulca
Donati, Auditor to Cardinal Antonio, was beheaded in the Castle of St. Angelo,
for going about without leave to speak with the said Cardinal his Master; and
to that effect are Gallows erected in St. Peter's Piatza. This Family has had
two Popes, and a great many Cardinals; and it was verily believed, a little
before Urban the eighths death, that the deceased Cardinal Savelli would have
been Pope, because he was a man of an approved good life, charitable, and
endued with all the qualities appertaining to an high Bishop; and it was the
rather so believed, for that in certain mountainous places, as one goes toward
the Seashore of Siena, there was a Marble stone found with an Epitaph upon it,
which said, that in the year 1645. there should be a Pope of the house of
Savelli, and in the very same stone were the arms of Savelli engraven. This
Fabritio, whilst his Uncle the Cardinal lived, was called the Abbot Savelli;
but his said Uncle being Archbishop of Salerno, obtained leave to resign his
Archbishopric, to the end it might be conferred on his said Nephew Fabritio,
as accordingly it was; and going afterward to his Residence there, he carried
himself in such sort, as he was well regarded by the people of that place: In
process of time he began to grow so covetous, and desirous of gain, that he
would not have stuck to have made away half a score men for money. It is not
many months since he returned to the Court, where he abode till such time as
he was promoted; for Innocent being as ardent in raising the Roman Nobility, as
Urban was intent in depressing it, he held it inconvenient, that so renowned a
House should remain deprived of those honors, with which in times past they
always superabounded; wherefore his Holiness made this Fabritio a Cardinal;
who is a man of good conversation, amiable, grateful, and very understanding;
but with all he is proud, making little account of other Families. These
Savelli are altogether Austrian, and are of near of kin to the Cardinal
Montalto, whose heirs they shall be after his decease; they are also allied to
the Orsini and Cesarini. This Cardinal is no great friend to the Ambassador of
France, who affronted him by denying him audience, because he went first to
visit the Ambassador of Spain.

XI. Francesco Cherubino.
FRancesco Cherubino da monte Bodio nella Marca; this man came privately to
Rome, and served the Cardinal Pamphilio, at this present Pope; a long time,
with great satisfaction to his Holiness: afterward finding himself able for
it, he put himself into the Prelacie, and having exercised diverse charges in
the Ecclesiastical state, it fortuned that Don Pamphilio was made Pope, who out
of gratitude to reward him, received him anew into his service in the
Apostolical Palace, and declared him his secret Auditor: After some time of
residence in the Apostolical Palace, he was promoted to the dignity of
Cardinal, with five others. This person is a man of ripe years, prudent, and
affable; diverse will have him to be somewhat a kin to his Holiness. He has
great Pensions, is of a good disposition, and a friend to the poor: He is not
much for the Princes, because he is a private man, but if he live, his
Holiness, no doubt will confer on him some Apostolical, or Provincial
Legateship, to the end he may give a proof of his abilities.

XII. Christoffero Vidman.
CHristoffero Vidman, a native of the City of Venice; some will have him
descended of base parentage; and the truth is, his Ancestors were but mean
persons, that in Venice made profession of Merchants Factors, who in process of
time attaining to some wealth, began to trade in Merchandise themselves;
whereby Giovanni Vidman, the Father of the now reigning Sons, got no ordinary
riches, in such sort as he bought diverse Castles and Lands in Carinthia and
Ortenburg: His Sons were in number five, that is, Giovanni Paolo, which is
dead, Lodovico, Martin, David, and Christofforo, the present Cardinal; who
together with his brother David came to Rome in the time of Urban, where
Christoffero, putting himself into the Prelacy, bought the Clerk of the
Chambers place, and so began to make show of the Talent which God had given
him. Afterward the Auditor of the same Chambers place being void, by Urbans
promoting him that enjoyed it to the Scarlet Gown, the said Christofforo
received that charge also, upon paying the usual price for it. But within a
while Urban the eighth dyed, and Pamphilio, Innocent the tenth, was created
Pope: who seeing the want the Chamber was in, supplied it after the wonted
manner, by selling the Offices of the Clerk and Auditor of the Apostolical
Chamber, which Vidman possessed, who was therefore promoted to the Scarlet
Gown, together with the Lord Raggi, Treasurer General of the holy Church, and
four other persons, the seventh of October in the year 1647. This Cardinal is
of a goodly presence, of a lusty complexion, young, and one that loves the
world. His Brother David is of the same condition he is of, delighting in
Sports, Comedies, and Feasts, and that not without Women. They are now
Gentlemen of Venice, to which Nobility they attained by paying down an hundred
thousand Ducats for it, according to the Decree made by that Republique in the
time of their necessities, occasioned by their War against the Turk. This
Cardinal is of a good disposition, merry, facetious, amiable, friendly, and
courteous, respecting every one, and honoring them that honor him; he is also
very splendid, so that he may well be said to be derived of the noble German
and Venetian Nation.

XIII. Lorenzo Raggi.
LOrenzo Raggi, a Nobleman of Genoua of the new Nobility, Nephew to the
deceased Cardinal of the same surname; which deceased Cardinal putting himself
into the Prelacie in the time of Urban the eighth, bought the place of Clerk of
the Chamber, as also that afterward of Auditor of the same: And because he was
not only simple, but altogether ignorant, he was every where known to be such;
for he never employed himself in any other thing but in giving public
audience pro forma: His ignorance was openly discovered in all occasions, and
in particular in a suit depending before him, where the Proctor of the one
side, desiring to defend his Clients cause, found that the Auditor Raggi
adhered to the adverse party, and therefore began to demonstrate unto his
honorable Lordship many lively reasons for the maintenance thereof, alleging
diverse Authors, and in particular said, that the Codice in such a Law made good
his Plea. My Lord Raggi, in regard that which the Proctor affirmed was
prejudicial to the party he favored, conceived according to his ignorant
opinion, that the Codice was some witness to be produced in judgment, and
therefore said unto the Proctor these precise words, I will thoroughly chastise
this Codice; and then demanded of him where he was, because he would have him
apprehended and sent to the Gallyes. The Proctor answered that he was to be
found in his Clients Advocates house; whereupon he commanded a Notary to send
some Officers along with the Proctor to the said Advocates house, to apprehend
the Codice; which being accordingly performed, the Codice was delivered unto
them, who thought it was some prohibited book, and that therefore they were
ordered to seize upon it; so they carried it to my Lord Raggi, who was then
Auditor of the Chamber; and the Proctor being arrived there with them, opened
the book, and found out the Law by him before cited; which Raggi seeing,
remained like a statue, quite besides himself. Now the sport and pastime that
was made of this matter throughout the City came to the ears of Urban the
eighth, who was ready to burst with laughing at it. Another time it happened,
that another Proctor came before him to defend another cause at his house,
which was just opposite to the Capranick College, where were diverse mad wags,
who as often as they saw him look out of his window, cried out, Bragone,
bragone, that is, great breeches or slops; so that after he was made Cardinal,
the common people ever after called him, as they had done, Bragone. Now whilst
the Proctor was attentive in pleading of his cause, he answered the Scholars of
the said College, saying, the Galleys, the Galleys. The Proctor believing that
he spoke in that manner against his Client, answered, My honorable Lord, the
poor man, my Client, deserves not the punishment of the Galleys; but in the
mean time Raggi, seeing those too insolent Scholars continue on still mocking
him, cried out with a loud voice, Not the Galleys, but the Gallows; which the
Proctor hearing, said, as it were vexed, My Lord, since you will needs send to
the Galleys, and hang one that no ways deserves it, you may do as you please;
and so went away from him. Before he was made Cardinal, he caused a Cardinals
garments to be made for him, and putting them on, he walked up and down his
house, and asked of his friends how they became him, and whether he did not
walk gravely enough in them: And out of the great desire he had to be a
Cardinal, he went one day to the Pope, who loved him for his harmless
simplicity, and after he had kissed his foot, he said, Holy Father, make me a
Cardinal, and so give satisfaction to the poor old man my Father. After he was
promoted to the Scarlet Gown, he went to thank his Holiness, and embracing him
said, I cannot choose but hug and kiss you, for joy that you have made me a
Cardinal. Pope Urban the eighth delighted so much in this man, as can hardly be
expressed, the truth whereof does appear by the effects; for he not only made
him a Cardinal, but also at his instance gave the Treasurorship General to
Lorenzo Raggi, his Nephew; unto whom, for a closing up of all other his
extravagancies, he said openly; Nephew, if you will arrive unto that which I
have attained unto, you must labor to carry your self, and do as I have done.
Whereat, not only all the standers by, but even his Nephew himself, could not
forbear laughing. Not long after the Treasurorship was conferred on Lorenzo,
the Cardinal his Uncle died, and made his Brother, the Marquess Raggi, his
heir; for which cause there has been a good while some distaste between the two
brothers, the Treasuror and the Marquess. The said Lorenzo Raggi was in the
time of Urban Superintendant of the Impositions laid upon the State
Ecclesiastical; during which charge of his, there fell out many disorders; for
in the Barbarini War, the Soldiers could not have their pay; so that two days
after Innocent the tenth was assumed to the Papacy, those Soldiers that were
appointed for the guard of the Conclave began to mutiny, because his Holiness
having ordained that every one of them should have four months pay, and so be
dismissed, Raggi would give them but two; wherewith they being very much
incensed, fell furiously to assaulting the house he was in, which they sacked,
and plundered all the money they found in it; chasing the said Raggi into Don
Tadeos Palace, where he shut up himself for fear of his life; but the soldiers
besieged him in it, and were bringing two pieces of Cannon to beat down the
gates, had not Innocent the tenth, newly elected, with his prudence given
remedy thereunto. Howsoever his Holiness was much offended with him for this
business, and every body thought, that he would have deprived him of his
charge, and made him resign up his Treasurors place; but afterward, at the
intercession of diverse persons, the matter went no further, and in the end he
was promoted to the Scarlet Gown in the secret consistory of the fourth of
October 1647. This Cardinal is young, about some five and twenty years of age,
and of a good conversation, but ambitious, and covetous: He is not
over-learned, nor ignorant, but holds the mean betwixt both.

XIV. Francesco Maidalchini.
FRancesco Maidalchini, a native of the City of Viterbo, and Nephew by her
Brother to the Lady Olimpia, the Sister-inlaw of Pope Innocent the tenth. This
Cardinal was a youth void of all manner of conversation, not being able to
carry himself with any civility; and therefore he was kept in a College, to
learn not only humane letters, but also good manners. Suddenly, upon the
making of Innocent the tenth Pope, the Lady Donna Olimpia, his Aunt, procured
an Abbots place for him; with which he lived reasonably well, but altogether
unknown to the world. Afterward, the Lord Camillo Pamphilio, Son to the same
Lady Donna Olimpia, and the Popes only Nephew, being promoted to the Scarlet
Gown, it happened, that by the death of the Prince Don Paolo Borghese, the Lady
Donna Olimpia Aldobrandina, Princess of Rossana, his Wife, became a Widow,
with whose beauty and riches the Cardinal Pamphilio was so taken, as he
abandoned the Scarlet Gown, and married her. But the poor Prince Don Camillo
was much troubled thereupon, for that by the Papal Bulls it was ordered, that
the Cardinals which renounced their Hats, and took Wives, should not enter into
the Roman Court for a certain prefixed time of some months: Howbeit he obeyed,
in hope he should obtain of the Pope his Uncle a dispensation for his return
unto the Court. But Donna Olimpia, his Mother, considering, that if he and his
Wife should come to abide in the Court, the authority and power which she had
with the Pope might be disturbed, labored with all her endeavor to keep the
Pope from permitting their return thither; saying, that it was not fit to have
so many Olimpian Ladies in the Court, because one alone (meaning her self) was
enough. This coming to the ears of the Princess, Don Camillo's Wife, she, as
a Lady extracted of so illustrious an House, could not choose but very much
resent it, insomuch as she imparted it to many Cardinals of the Court; and the
like did also the Prince Don Camillo her Husband, with threatening revenge.
Which being understood by the widow Mother, Donna Olimpia, who being of a
man-like, bitter, and vindicative nature, was so provoked therewith, that
hearing how his Holiness was minded to promote to the Scarlet Gown one of the
House of Pamphilio, she went and so conjured him, as she diverted him from that
purpose, and withal drew him to promise to make the aforesaid Francesco
Maidalchini Cardinal, as accordingly he did in the Consistory of the seventh of
October 1647. At which promotion, not only the Court stood amazed, but all the
foreign Princes likewise, who mightily blamed it: But it was brought to pass
by the cunning of Donna Olimpia, to the end she might introduce him into the
same command of the State Ecclesiastical, which Barbarino had enjoyed under
Urban the eighth; and having given a beginning unto it, in regard he was unfit
for business, she, with the consent of his Holiness, put him under the
schooling of the Cardinals Panzirolo and Cherubino, that he might be instructed
by them in the affairs of the Court; and not contented herewith, she oftentimes
solicited the Pope, because he had no Cardinal Nephew, to declare him for such,
to no other end but to take away all hope from the Prince, her Son, and his
Wife, of future authority and adherence, and his Holiness was inclined to
condescend thereunto. But it coming to the ears of the Nuns his Sisters, they
all joined together, with the Princess Lodovisia, the Prince Camillo's Sister,
and going in great fury to the Pope, they with much resentment gave him to
understand, that it was very inconvenient for him to declare any person of a
strange Family Cardinal Nephew; and that yielding thereunto, he would give all
the world occasion to talk of it: and in this manner they drew his Holiness to
promise them, that he would never permit any such thing. About the same time
the Pope fell sick of a retention of urine, so that it was thought he would
have dyed: whereupon the Prince Camillo went in secret to visit his Uncle, who
received him very lovingly, and calling Cardinal Panziroli to him, he willed
him to deliver unto the said Prince his Nephew the money that was in his
keeping, which amounted unto two millions and an half; and then to keep the
Mother from beng distasted at his coming to the Court, he caused it to be given
out, that he was gone to Caprarola, whilst in the mean time he lay close in a
private house unknown. But Donna Olimpia, understanding that the money was
consigned unto the Prince her Son, took on so exceedingly at it, that she
remained some days sick therewith; for she verily believed that it should have
come unto her hands, according to the hope his Holiness had given her of it;
and they continue still with great disturbance amongst themselves, in the
terms whereof I have before given some hint. It is held for certain, that our
Lord the Pope very much repented the promoting of Maidalchini, in regard it is
universally known how ignorant he is, being scarce able to talk; and therefore
he is of so little esteem with the other Cardinals, that they make, as it were,
a gaming stock of him. Besides, he himself never humors any one, nor returns a
courtesy to any that honors him; and therefore he is accounted of according to
his breeding.

Urban the eighth in diverse promotions created the following Cardinals, besides
many others which dyed, before and after the assumption of Innocent the tenth;
but especially he gave the Scarlet Gown to the Cardinal Francisco Barberino,
his Nephew, in the first Consistory that he held.

XV. Francesco Barberino.
FRancesco Barberino, a Florentine, and Nephew to the deceased Pope Urban the
eighth, the Son of his brother. He was a man, during his Uncles being a
Prelate, and a Cardinal, which one would hardly have vouchsafed to salute if he
had met him in the streets of Rome; in so poor, and ill a plight he was; he
went to school in the College, where he was no better esteemed of then any one
mean Artificers Son; so that he would have taken it for a great injury if any
man had told him that he should have been the Popes Nephew: yet afterward
Fortune, which has no measure in her doings, lifted him up so high, as to
think of it only makes people amazed, and besides themselves. The Cardinals
stood in the Conclave questioning about the making of a Pope, and after they
had continued there a long time, being much wearied, they resolved to elect
such a person, as not only was not capable of the Papacy, in regard of his
young years, but also that was not known to be of too stirring and high a
spirit; insomuch as they all unanimously confessed, that when they were in the
Conclave they never thought, nor ever came it into their minds, to assume such
a person to the Papacy: and after he was elected, that old wise Cardinal
Crescentio cried out in the same Conclave so loud, that every one might hear
him, saying, we have elected a piece of a Pope: which words verily were worthy
of consideration, and how they were afterward made good in the time of his
Papacy, every one may Imagine. At such time as Urban the eighth was elected,
Francesco and Antonio were in the schools, when as a great clamor of voices
were heard crying out, long live Pope Urban Barberino, and at the very same
instant came many Princes, and a world of Caroches to take them from the
schools, giving them the title of Excellency, and reverencing them with great
honors. Francesco in the first Consistory, which his Holiness held, was created
Cardinal, and in regard his young age was too unapt for the government, the
Pope gave him my Lord Filomarini for his Governor, but with the title of Master
of his Chamber, in which place he had served before the same Urban. Barberino
as soon as soon as he saw himself to have attained to the credit of managing
affairs, he abhorred the conversation of Filomarini, insomuch that he utterly
declined it, and began to govern of himself, so far forth that out of his
absolute arrogance and pride he usurped the Title of Cardinale Patron, a Title
verily which was never heard, nor ever will be heard, to be assumed by any
Popes Nephew. Some months after, Urban promoted Antonio to the Scarlet Gown,
and then sent both of them Legates a Latere, Francesco into Spain, and Antonio
into France; and one of them took upon him the protection of the one Kingdom,
and the other of the other. Francesco afterward had a large pension from the
Catholic King, and made profession of obeying the commands of that Majesty.
Urban for ten years together governed absolutely, in which time Francesco had
not the power, as one may say, to raise up a straw from the ground, but those
ten years once past, Urban fell to decline through age, and sickness, and then
began he to lift up his head. This Cardinal had nothing else good in him but
the gratifying a poor man, that in tomporibus had paid for a pot of Wine for
him at the Tavern, whom he made Yeoman of his Horse. In the time of his Empire
he disstasted all the Princes; and inprimis I may begin with the Emperor
Ferdinand the second, who upon his election to that State, sent the Prince of
Egenberg to Rome for his Ambassador of obedience to the Pope, where being
arrived, that which ensued thereupon is known to every one. The King of Spain
was so affronted by him and his Uncle, as more could not be: for what greater
affront can be done to a Crown, then to give for money, and not otherwise, the
Scarlet Gown to a deserveing person; such a one as the Abbot Pereti was, unto
whom they denied it, out of the inward hate that they bore him. They lent money
to the French, to the end they might make and continue War on the House of
Austria; they gave aid against the State of Milan; used notable deceit in the
disposing of Mantoua and Casale; caused the Marquess de los Velez, the
Catholic Ambassador, to be assaulted by the French, and the Bishop of Amega
the Portugal, who by force would have been acknowledged by the Ambassador, that
reputed him a Rebel; and gave a world of disgusts besides, which to recount
would take up a whole year. The King of France too, notwithstanding all the
House of Barberini seem to be well affected to that Crown, has had his share
of disgusts from them; by delaying the demand of the Hat for the Cardinal
Mazzarino; by the dishonor which Antonio did to his Majesty's Ambassador, in
getting his daughter with child under color of friendship, and afterward
poisoning her, as it is verily believed, at Caprarola; insomuch that the poor
Lord not knowing else how to be revenged, was fain to serve under the command
of the Duke of Parma in the War against the said Barberini. Then the distaste
which they gave not only to the Ambassador Coure, but even to the most
Christian King himself, by causing the head of Monsieur de Ronti, the said
Ambassadors Kinsman, to be stricken of by the hangman; and lastly the betraying
of that Majesty in the Conclave, by helping to promote Pamphilio to the
Papacy, whom the King desired to exclude. Moreover the Internal and External
disgusts, known to all, which they gave to the great Duke of Toscan, to the
Duke of Parma, to the Duke of Modena, and to the Republique of Venice; by
offering to take Borgo-sansepolcro from the great Duke; by taking from the Duke
of Parma, Castro, Capralo, Ronaglione, and other States, as also endeavoring
to take from him likewise Parma, and Placentia, because he would not match with
them; by making War on the Duke of Modena, upon their pretension to Comachio;
and on the Republique of Venice, for to make them remove out of their Ducal
Chamber the ancient pictures of their Naval fight and Victory for the
restitution of Pope Alexander the sixth to his former Estate. They denied the
King of Polana the Hat for Monsieur Vicconti; they suffered the Cardinal Orsino
to affront the deceased Queen Mother of France in the person of her Agent; in
Rome they annihilated the Nobility; heheaded the Marquess Manzioli, alias
Bentivoglio, who having been prime Clerk of the Chamber, had resigned that
office, and married a wife, upon pretext that he had made a book against the
Court of Rome; they put to death the Marquess Centini d' Ascoli in Campo de
fiore, alleging that he had complotted against the life of the Pope, only to
disable his Uncle for the Papacy; they sent Anarea Casale to the Galleys, to
the end his Wealth might come to the Cardinal Spada, and other their
well-willers, causing him in fifteen days to be bastinadoed to death; they
banished the Duke of Cerinto the State of Avignon, upon pretense that he had
framed infamous libells against the old deceased Cardinal Verospi; they kept
Mario Frangipano a long time in prison, although he was a Cavalier of quality,
very old, and in a manner decrepit, and exposed him to the torture, upon
pretense that he had given order for the putting of a fellow to death, that was
found hanged in the prison of a certain Castle, notwithstanding that they which
had committed the fact confessed publicly at the Gallows, how the said Lord
was altogether innocent thereof; and this they did to no other end, but to force
him to leave his estate unto them, with this reservation, that he should enjoy
it so long as he lived, and then it should fall unto the Church; but he would
never consent thereunto, saying always thus, If I be innocent let me be freed,
if I be not innocent let me be punished; and had not the War with the Princes
of Italy happened, the poor Lord had been made an end of; for then they set him
at liberty upon condition that he should engage himself in the war against the
said Princes. Furthermore they sought to ruin the House of Borghese, because
they had concluded matrimony with Donna Olimpia Aldobrandina, unto whom the
Popes eldest Nephew was a suitor, and for that reason they disgraced them all
that ever they could. They deprived Vittaleschi, General of the Jesuits, and
Ridolsi General of the Dominicans, of their General ships, under pretext of
sundry misdemeanors committed by them. They most unjustly bereft the said
Princes Borghesi of the state of Meldola; and caused Don Paolo Borghese, the
Prince his Son, and husband to the said Donna Aldobrandina, to be basely
affronted by a common Captain of the watch. They drove a world of poor people,
not only from Rome, but also out of all the state Ecclesiastical, and made
them go and live in other parts, by reason of the grievous taxes and
impositions which they laid upon them. They caused many thousands of men, that
served under their ensigns, to perish for hunger, whilst they gave them no
pay, and that bread too, which they provided to relieve them, was mixed with
chalk, which fretted out the soldiers guts, and made them die like dogs.
Innocent the tenth, in the beginning of his Papacy, was so tired with
Petitions and complaints against Francesco for his injustice and extortions,
that he caused him to be cited to render an account of his administration,
which he satisfied with his flight into France. This Cardinal enjoyed under
Urban above forty seven Abbacies, and Benefices, with other revenues, the
least of which yielded two or three thousand crowns a year; besides those that
came to thirty thousand, and forty thousand, as also the Vicechancellorship of
the Holy Church, which has eighteen protections of Monasteries of Nuns, and
Convents of Friars. In sum he was become a wardrobe of Ecclesiastical
Benefices; and in the Court of Rome things were grown to that pass, as no man
took a servant, were it for never so vile an Office, unless he were preferred
by this Cardinal Barberino; and this he did out of a diabolical policy; for by
this means he held correspondencie with all those, which he had placed as spies
upon their Masters, and so came to discover whatsoever they said, or did. He
has made show of being a wondrous honest man, and under color thereof has
deceived I know not how many women. I think now the world will confess there
was never any Cardinal that so much tyrannized over the Church, and
Christendom: and hoc sufficit.

XVI. Ernesto Adalberto d' Arach.
ERnesto Adalberto d' Arach, is a rich Lord, of the German Nation: He was a
Priest, and promoted by Urban the eighth to the Scarlet Gown, at the instance
of the Emperor, in the place of Pier Luigi Caraffa, Bishop of Tricario. This
person is a man of great parts, and of good life, in regard whereof he was
advanced to the Archbishopric of Prague, where he has behaved himself much
to his own commendation, and the satisfaction of all the people there, being
highly esteemed for his good disposition and qualities; howbeit I cannot say
much of him, because he resides not in the Court, but continues always at his
Church in Prague, and therefore not without reason was it said, when last he
came to Rome a little before the death of Urban the eighth, that it was an ill
Omen, and a bad sign, when the Consi were seen to approach the City, meaning
that Arach not being wont to come unto Rome, his coming now thither was a
foretoken of the Popes ensuing death, as accordingly it fell out. This Cardinal
is well regarded of Caesar, and as his subject, he is, and always will be at
his devotion. He is very Charitable, Bountiful, Courteous, Affable, and
Friendly.

XVII. Giulio Sachetti.
GIulio Sachetti, a Florentine, the Son of a Merchant, who was partner with the
Father of Urban the eighth, whilst they traded together, being thought to be of
kin a far off. The said Giulio was made Bishop of Gravina, whether he never
went, because he was suddenly sent by Urban Nuncio into Spain, where all the
time that he exercised that charge, he carried himself very worthily, and to
the great satisfaction of that Crown; wherefore he was promoted by Urban to the
Scarlet Gown, as likewise were all the other Nuntioes, except Caraffa. He was
much esteemed of by Urban, who conferred on him many benefits and graces,
making him also Keeper of the Seal of Justice, which he still exercises. He is
a Lord of great merit, and the Barberini thought without all doubt to have
created him in the past Conclave Pope; but they failed in their purpose, whilst
by the power of the Spanish faction he was excluded, not because he was not a
deserving person, but in regard he was too much affected and obliged to the
said Barberini: Others say he was excluded, for that upon the assembly of a
Congregation touching the receiving of the Ambassador of the King of Portugal,
he had showed himself inclined to receive him; as also by reason he was too
great a friend to Mazzarino, who had been a follower of his, so as necessarily
he would have been an Enemy and depressor of the Spaniards, and would have
followed the stepps of Urban. He is of an exemplary life, Charitable, Pleasant,
and Rich, but not very Liberal, for, as a Florentine, he is somewhat penurious,
and niggardly. He has two Brothers, Mattheo and Alessandro, whereof the first
has to wife a Lady of the House of Rocellai, a Family amongst the Florentines
sufficiently French; and he has many Sons: the second has served in the
Wars of Flanders under the Catholic King. Mattheo; at such time as the Sea
was vacant, was qualified with a title of the Church by Barberino, who held
Sachetti certainly for Pope, as in like manner did Mattheo, insomuch that he
caused the Cellar of his Palace to be set open for every body to drink as much
Wine as he would for joy: whereupon, after they had well drunk, they cried out
publicly, long live Pope Sachetti; but when as afterward he saw that
Pamphilio was made Pope, for very spite and rage he fell madd: And thus may
every one judge, if Sachetti had been Pope, what a confusion there would have
been in the Roman Court, and in what a condition the State Ecclesiastical would
have been; for through their avarice they would have ruined all. The greatest
confident Sachetti has, is thought to be the Cardinal Falconieri, now Legate
of Bologna, who was promoted by Urban at the instance of the said Sachetti,
after his return from being Nuncio in Flanders, from whence he was excluded by
the Cardinal Infant, for that he knew him to be too much French. Sachetti has
diverse times murmured against the Government of Monarchy; whence he was held by
the Regal Ministers to be alienated from desiring the felicity of the Austrian
Family, which has done him but little good. The greatest obstacle he has had,
and has, is the great Duke, who having found Pope Barberino little available
to him, seeks with all his power to keep any Vassal of his from coming to the
Papacy, and therefore Sachetti will never attain unto it, although the
Spaniards should concur with him; which is unlikely, notwithstanding he seems
to be devoted to Spain, whereas indeed he is contrary unto it; but I should
judge the Catholic King to be directly out of his wits, if ever he concur
with him more, seeing he was the confident Counselor first of Antonio's, and
afterward Francesco's and Tadeo's flight into France. At the end of the
Conclave a writing came forth, entitled the passion of Sachetti, beginning
thus, Passio Domini nostri secundum Matthaeum; which to avoid prolixity I will
omit, the rather too because it serves not for our purpose. Another writing
also came forth, which said, He that entered Pope, came out Cardinal.

XVIII. Bernardino Spada.
BErnardino Spada, a native of Brisighella, of an ordinary Family, being
descended of Colliers. He put himsele into the Prelacie, and was by Urban the
eigth exercised in many Charges, and then sent into France, where he resided a
good while, and spent there a great part of his Patrimony. Urban, knowing his
merits, promoted him to the Scarlet Gown, the rather because in his Nuntioes
place he had carried himself to the satisfaction of both parts. He is a person
of great abilities, is well verst in all manner of Negotiations, and is an
excellent Statesman. He was picked out and chosen by Uban the eighth, as a man
of Authority and worth, to compose the differences depending between him and
the Duke of Parma, who was come with a great Army to the confines of the
Ecclesiastical State. and had seized on diverse Lands and Castles of the
Apostolic Sea, and in particular Aquapendente, where the said Duke had
entrenched himself: In front of whom stood Antonio with an Army of twelve
thousand foot, and four thousand horse to keep him from overrunning the
Ecclesiastical State; and Spada was sent with the title of Plenipotentiary, to
conclude an agreement: He went, acted, and returned, but was by Urban very ill
rewarded; for after he had concluded, and signed the Capitulations of the
accord, wherein the great Duke of Toscan, the Republique of Venice, and the
Duke of Modena, intervened as mediators, Urban, seeing the Duke departed, and
gone to his States of Parma and Placentia, declared the said Capitulations
null, and invalid; saying that Spada motu proprio, and without his consent, had
signed them. Herewith the aforesaid Princes held themselves justly offended,
and seeing the Pope leavy soldiers to send against the Duke of Parma, each of
those Princes took up arms to defend him. But Cardinal Spada, beholding his
reputation blemished in this sort, without any fear at all published a Manifest
of his Reasons, saying, that all that he had done, and capitulated, was with
his Holiness, goodwill and approbation. When the world plainly saw that the
poor Cardinal had no way faulted, but had exactly observed the commandments of
the Pope, he was by all men pitied: but the War which ensued thereupon with
the spilling of so much blood, was that which cleared the business, and brought
the Cardinal into greater credit then before; for in process of time the Pope
was fain with the damage of the holy Church, and his own reputation, to make a
peace, with giving full satisfaction to the pretendants, which had made War
in diverse places; and in particular the great Duke of Toscan on Perugia side,
and the Duke of Parma, the Republique of Venice, and the Duke of Modena, in the
Bolognese. This Cardinal is no great friend to the House of the Barberini, for
the causes aforementioned. Spada is obstinately devoted o the Crown of France,
quite contrary to the Cardinal Rocci his Kinsman, who is altogether for the
Spaniard. In the past Conclave he labored much for the election of Innocent
the tenth, and therefore is well regarded of him. This Cardinal is a great
person, has a wise head, and is full of high thoughts. He is a Poet, an
Historian, and a Politician, so that he will leave all the pastime of the world
for to study. He was one that inherited the greatest part of the state of
Andrea Casale the Bolognose, and was also the principal instrument of his
ignominious death in the Galleyes; but God, as a just Judge, will not leave
such a wickedness unpunished. Now because there are many that have not been
made acquainted with this doubtful History, and may be desirous to know it, I
will not omit the relation of it as succinctly as I can. Andrea Casale, the Son
of a rich and Noble Senator of Bologna, his Father being dead, remained a child
under the Government of his Mother, together with two Sisters which were made
Nuns. This Andrea, being come to man's Estate, and full of generosity and
spirit, thought it too base a thing for him to live drowned in idleness and
delights; wherefore he resolved, though against his Mothers will, to go into
Hungary, and there for the acquiring of fame to serve the Emperor in his Wars
against the Turk, as accordingly he did: And being arrived in Hungary, had the
Charge of a Captain of a Troop of Horse conferred on him. Now it happened
certain months after, that the Turks gave the Emperors forces a great defeat,
wherein many Lords were slain, and many were made prisoners, and in particular
the said Signor Andrea Casale. The report of this defeat being spread over all
Italy, they that pretended to the inheritance of Andrea's estate were very
desirous to know whither he we alive, or dead; whereupon diverse Bolognese
soldiers being returned to Bologna, whether it were that they were suborned
with money, as for some other end, they gave out that the said Andrea Casale
was dead; and further they made Affidavit, that they had seen him dead, and
also had buried him with their own hands. In the mean time the poor Cavalier
remained in the hands of the Turks, and continually wrote letters unto his
Mother, to send money for the ransoming of him; which letters for the most part
fell into the hands of those, that pretended to the inheriting of his estate,
and were still by them secretly burnt: Nevertheless it could not choose but that
some of them should come unto his Mother, who with great joy imparted them to
their kindred, by whom she was condemned for a foolish and imprudent old woman,
telling her that her Son Andrea was dead, and that those letters were forged by
some one, that meant to cheat her; so the good Lady; being put of in this
manner, at length dyed with grief, and, after many years, it was the will of
God, that the poor Signior was redeemed by the holy Company of the Trinity,
with many other men, and women, who were, as it were in triumph, all clad in
white, conducted after a Procession manner to Rome; where being arrived, the
poor Cavalier knew not which way to turn himself: but God, which never abandons
any, made him call to mind, how one Giovanni Antonio, who had formerly received
many courtesies from him at Bologna, was at that instant Captain of the watch in
Rome; wherefore he went unto him, and having acquainted him with his fortunes,
the Captain, moved with pity to see a person of that quality reduced to such
terms; and very well knowing him to be the true Andrea Casale, assigned him a
Caroach, with two Lackies, and forty Crowns a month; which after he had
continued unto him for the space of seven or eight weeks, he brought him to
the presence of the Pope, who received him very graciously, and showed to be
glad of his recovered liberty; little thinking then that he himself should be
he, that afterward should not only deprive him of liberty, but of his life
also. Andrea having informed his Holiness, how all his estate had been seized
upon, and was wrongfully possessed by others, humbly besought him to do him
that grace and justice, as to restore him to his own again; which the Pope had
a good intention to grant: whereupon he commenced a suit against them that had
gotten his estate, who came running with all speed to the Court, to oppose
him, and proved that Andrea Casale was dead, and that this was a mere
counterfit, and an impostor; wherefore Signior Andrea was constrained to become
a prisoner, and so to defend himself, and prove, that he was the true Andrea
Casale. His Holiness caused a process thereof to be framed in the City of
Bologna, where the nurse that gave him suck then lived, who upon her
examination averred that he had a certain mark upon his left shoulder, which
upon search was accordingly found there; besides diverse other testimonies, that
manifested, he was the true Andrea. Cardinal Spada, seeing the matter go so
ill on his side, sought with fraud to beguile him, and gave him to understand,
that if he would desist from his suite, and revoke all his pretensions, he
would assign him a Caroach with four servants, and revenewes yearly, able to
maintain him like a Cavalier, as long as he lived: Which Andrea hearing, cried
out publicly, saying: Either I am Andrea Casale, and will have all that is
mine; or I am not he, and will have nothing. This coming to the knowledge of
Spada, he went as it were in a desperate mood to the Pope, and so earnestly
besought him not to suffer his, and many other Families, amongst whom the
inheritance of Andrea Casale was distributed, to be undone by taking the same
from them, that his Holiness, I know not how, did most unjustly, not only not
put him in Possession of his estate, but wickedly sent him to the Galleys;
where, least upon change of the Pope he might set a foot his claim anew,
Cardinal Spada wrought in such sort with the Commanders of the Galleyes, that
in the space of fifteen days he was bastinadoed to death. A case verily worthy
of compassion, and the mishap of this poor unfortunate Cavalier deserves for
example sake to be published to all the World; his death being bewailed not
only by the common people, but by all the Nobility of Rome, and Bologna.

XIX. Federico Carnaro.
FEderico Cornaro, a Noble man of Venice; he was Bishop of Vicenza in
Lombardie, and afterward was made Bishop of Padon. He was promoted to the
Scarlet Gown at the instance of his Rebublique, as a man deserving, and of a
good life. He is sixty years of age, or thereabout; wherefore he pretends much
to Peter's Chair, and it will not be hard for him to attain thereunto, being
devoted as he is to the House of Austria; whereof not only he, but his whole
Family makes open profession; his Country alone may be contrary, and an
obstacle unto him: He is a person of no mean understanding, Affable and
Courteous, and is therefore much esteemed of by the sacred College. He has
diverse Nephews, who are little seen in the Court; but the eldest of them, at
such time as his Uncle was Bishop of Padoa, led a most wicked and dissolute
life in Rome, which was accompanied with so infinite a pride, that it was able,
as one may say, to cause another fall of Angels from Heaven; And this alone
will be enough to keep Cornaro far from the Papacy; otherwise he has no
defects of any consideration, being charitable, and worthy of all Honor. The
Family of the Cornari is one of the principal of that Republique, having had
many Dukes, and Senators issued from it, as also a Queen of Cyprus, who gave
that Kingdom to the Venetians, by which donation they held it a long time. He
resigned the Bishopric of Padoa, and had the Patriarchship of Venice, which
after some years he also resigned. He is much esteemed of his Republique,
although there has past some disgusts between them.

XX. Martio Ginetti.
MArtio Ginetti, born in the City of Veletri, of vile descent, the Son of a
common Artificer: He came to Rome in the beginning of the creation of Urban the
eighth, where he courted diverse Cardinals, and in the end putting himself into
the Prelacy, he got into the favor of the Cardinal Francesco Barberino, who
brought him into such credit with the Pope his Uncle, that he held him in great
esteem, and promoted him to the Scarlet Gown, to the end he should acknowledge
no other dependancie, then that of the house of Barberini. His holiness
enriched him with many benefices, and made him Vicar of the Papacy; which
Office is during life; he made him also Protector of the whole order of the
Carmelites, and caused him to lodge continually in the Apostolical Palace. Now
because he was altogether unknown to Princes, and was of no account abroad, the
Barberini resolved to illustrate him in the sight of the World, and so sent him
Legate into Germany to treat of a universal peace, to the end all Christendom
might acknowledge him for the principal instrument of the public good; but
the unhappy issue of that his charge showed his ignorance rather, and
imprudence, rendering himself ridiculous in so sublime an employment, whereby he
no way profited Christendom, but exceedingly profited himself and his House;
for living very sparingly, he pursed up the most part of that great
entertainment which was assigned him for his Legateship: In his return back
toward Rome, and as he was upon the way, there was sent him by an express post
to Ferrara a Grant of the Legates place of that City, where he heaped up no
little riches; and after his arrival at Rome, Cardinal Capucino paid him all
the profits accruing of his Vicarshish by him administered in his absence. This
Cardinal has given to his Kinsmen all the Offices and Dignities that possibly
he can: He is not very learned, although he has taken great pains in studying.
The Barberini will never nominate him in the Conclave, for they are sure it
will not succeed, in regard he is known to be too much their partial obligee.
He is but little respected in the sacred College, though by reason of his age
he is capable of being Pope. Whosoever looks upon the house of this Cardinal,
will always behold it void of all resort, none going thither but those which
have business appertaining to the Vicarship, and that are of necessity to pass
thorough his hands; so that one shall never see any visitant Coches there, he
being no otherwise accounted of, then as of a forelorn Cardinal. He shows
himself to be no way depending on any of the Princes, out of the pretension he
has to the Papacy; and albeit he was Lagate a Latere with the Emperor for the
universal peace, as aforesaid, yet is he not for all that devoted to the House
of Austria; because he, being wholly dependant on the Barberini, will, as such,
be allwaies French, if not openly, at leastwise secretly. His behavior is
familiar and phlegmatic, seeming to favor every one, and is of an indifferent
good nature, but melancholic.

XXI. Don Antonio Barberino.
DON Antonio Barberino, the crookback, Nephew to Urban the eighth, and the
brother of Francesco and Tadeo; he was born in Rome, and therefore intitles
himself a Roman. He was by the Pope created Prior of the great Cross of Malta,
with an intention not to make him a Cardinal, it seeming sufficient unto him,
that he had already promoted to that dignity Francesco his eldest Nephew, and
the Capuchin his brother; but Antonio so importuned his Uncle, that at length
he promoted him also to the Scarlet Gown, which above all things he he was
ambitious of. This Cardinal was even from his birth ever bountiful, and has
with donatives and magnanimity drawn many to his devotion, insomuch that
although he has committed some errors and excesses, yet is he not therefore so
rigorously envyed, whilst being possessed of the goods of fortune he has also
made others partakers thereof, and has prodigally spent his own. He has not
been a little taken with the beauties of women, on whom he has wasted great
sums of Gold: La Checa Buffona in temporibus was his Mistress, who out of the
confidence that she had in the protection of the Cardinal Antonio, went up and
down masked in the Carneval time, for which the Governor of Rome caused her
without any respect at all to be whipped thorough the City. He got with child
the Daughter of the Marquess of Coure, Ambassador of France: To a Neapolitan
Curtesan, which dwelt in the Giulian street, he gave for the first time a
thousand crowns: but, not to say more, this alone shall serve for a closing up
of so many indignities this Cardinal has committed, that to a Pedant, which
had the charge of a very fair boy, the Son of a Gentleman, whom he let him
enjoy several times, he gave for a reward thereof a Bishopric, nella Marca di
Marcantonio. I will not speak of his bardache, whom being but the Son of a
barber, he has reduced to such a pass, as not content with having enriched
him, he has caused him to be adorned with the title of a Marquess. The said
Cardinal was sent Legate Apostolical, and Generalissimo, into the States of
Bologna, Ferrara, and Romagna, against the Princes of Italy, where he carried
himself valiantly, and with the satisfaction not only of all those people, but
also of the souldierie; and if any one has traduced his good name, saying,
that he was privy to the death of the convert Nuns of Magdalens in Bologna,
he lies; for Antonio was not of Council with that fact; but indeed after the
Delinquents were discovered, in stead of chastising, he favored and protected
them, the one being Carlo Poscente, and the other Manente his Secretary; nay
more, he sent Carlo Poscente for his Vice-Duke into the state of Segni, and
also kept the Archbishop of Bologna from proceeding against them, enjoining him
to speak no more thereof. I cannot deny but Antonio committed an error in
having so little regard to his reputation; for as Legate Apostolical a Latere,
as General, and as the Popes Nephew, he might with all rigor have taken
information of the matter, and then arraigned and condemned them to the
punishment, which the heynousness of their offense requited, and afterward he
might graciously have pardoned them; for so he had showed himself a just Judge,
and they too, as if they had been sufficiently chastised, had not incurred
that, which after the death of the Pope his Uncle, arrived unto them; being
both of them first confined unto his Palace, and after that sent prisoners to
Bologna, where they were put to death; and Antonio himself was necessitated to
fly into France, very much pitied by most men, whereas every one wished all
the mischief they could devise to Francesco, and Tadeo. This Cardinal is
Chamberlain of the holy Church, Archpriest della Basilica disanta Maria
Maggiore, has many Abbacies and Protections, and will always be at the
devotion of the French King, by whom he is defended, and protected in these his
misfortunes; but it is believed, that he is now returned again into the Popes
favor by the mediation of the Crown of France.

XXII. Girolamo Colonna.
GIrolamo Colonna, of the Title di Santo Eustachio, and of a most ancient and
noble Roman family, which has had many Popes, and a world of Cardinals. He was
promoted to the Scarlet Cown by Urban the eighth, together with Cardinal
Antonio, at the instance of the Prince Prefect, of Donna Anna Barberina, and of
the Constable, in regard of the affinity, that was contracted between them.
This Cardinal is richly furnished with the goods of fortune, and estates; he is
understanding, prudent; well esteemed of in the Court, and reverenced in the
sacred College, both for his blood, and wisdom: And his carriage does not
displease, although he goes proudly, and stately through the City, like another
Martin the fifth; but withal he is courteous, honors every one, is exceeding
liberal, and well affected to the Pope, who therefore loves him, as also for
that he was very partial in his election. Urban the eighth made him Archbishop
of Bologna, which Archbishopric, after he had held it certain years, he
resigned in the time of Innocent the tenth unto my Lord Albergati, a Bolognese
Gentleman, who is now a Cardinal, by the name of Lodovisio Colonna. Albeit the
Colonesi and the Barberini have matched together, yet have there no effects of
friendship past betwixt them for diverse private interests: Neither are the
Colonesi any great friends to the House of the Gaetani, also a most ancient and
noble Roman family; for that Don Gregorio Gaetano, the brother of the Duke of
Sermoneta, and Uncle of the Prince of Caserta, was in a manner treacherously
killed by Don Carlo Colonna; who for that fact was by Urban the eighth
condemned to death, and afterward pardoned, to the end no future Pope should
take any further cognizance of that cause; and to save his life, that was in
danger by reason of that enmity, he made himself a friar of the order of Saint
Benedict, and then was by Urban the eighth preferred to be Archbishop in
partibus infidelium. The said House of Colonna likewise does not much love the
House of the Cesarini, although the occasion of Don Gregorio Gaetanoe's death
proceeded from Don Carlo his defending the reputation of the Duke Cesarino his
Nephew, who being under age, pretended that he had received an affront from the
said Gregorio Gaetano, in making him by force to stay in his way, that his
Caroach might have the precedence. The House of the Constable Colonna holds
little correspondence with the house of the Prince of Galliclano, and of the
Prince of Carbognano, alias Duke of Bassanella, all of the house of Colonna;
who though they be all sprung out of one stock, yet does each of them pretend
to be better, then the other, for the pre-eminence: the truth is, that the
house of the Prince of Carbognano is the right family, derived from Sciano
Colonna; and therefore with reason is the Piatza, where his Palace is
scitunted, called the Piatza of Sciana. These Lords at first were all for the
Catholic Crown, but upon the matching of the Constable Colonnaes House with
the Pope, the Spaniards for their own interest honored them with such Titles,
and States, as the Duke of of Bassanello, of a differing House, was therewith
to distasted, that he set up the ames of the most Christian King, and took to
wife the base daughter of the Duke of Parma. The Prince of Gallieano was made a
prisoner at Naples, upon pretext of rebellion, a little before the rising of
that people, for that there were many saddles, arms, and much ammunition found
in his Castles, which he possessed in the Province of Abruzzo: and whilst all
things seemed to be composed, and that he was ready to be absolved, and set at
liberty, a new conspiracy of diverse Princes and Barons of the Kingdom of
Naples against the Catholic King was discovered, amongst whom the Prince of
Gallicano was included; for a certain Neapoletan Apostate Theatin, named Andrea
Paolucci, being intercepted and apprehended with letters about him to several
Neapolitan Lords from France, and put to the torture, named many, and in
particular the said Prince of Gallicano. The Constable also, brother to the
Cardinal, was not long since, at such time as Gallicano was a prisoner,
summoned by the Viceroy to come to Naples, and he put himself in the way to
have gone thither, but in the midst of his journey he returned, and in his
stead sent a gentleman of his family to feign that he was so indisposed in his
health, as he could not come himself: for had he gone in person, I am persuaded
he likewise would have fallen into the same labyrinth. This House has ever
been devoted to that of Austria, and the present Cardinal will always be of
the Spanish faction, if disgusts do not arise from new discoveries. He is a
haughty Lord, and very sensible, insomuch as he was for a good while distasted
with the old Cardinal de Medici about precedence; but the differences between
them were composed by Innocent the tenth, immediately upon his creation.

XXII. Cirriaco Rocci.
CIrriaco Rocci, a Roman, his Original descent was from the City of Cremona in
the state of Milan; He was a Prelate, and sent Nuntio by Urban the eighth to
the Emperors Majesty, after which he promoted him to the Scarlet Gown. This
Cardinal in not very intelligent, but seeemes to know much; he is an old man,
pretends greatly to the Papacy, and is not ashamed to speak of it to every
one, promising in that case, Dignities, Graces, and Favors. In the last
Conclave he endeavored much for his exaltation thereunto, reposing all his
hopes in the hands of Cardinal Spada, his kinsman; but for all that he would
not propound him, knowing full well, that for his respect he would have been
excluded, and so he should have had his fortune discomposed for the future, as
the Barberini did in the person of Sachetti: and the reason of it is, that if
Rocci were Pope, the said Cardinal Spada would command all; who is not much
desired of any, and in particular abhorred of the Barberini, because they know
him to be of a too stirring, and fantastical a humor. He has one Nephew, that
is the Abbot Rocci, who would be he, that should reign; but in regard of his
young years he would not be fit for the Government. He is a very affable Lord,
of a good life, and most devoted to the House of Austria, making open
profession thereof; wherefore he will always be Spanish, though he be the
Barberinies creature. He is well regarded of the present Pope Innocent the
tenth.

XXIV. Giovanni Battista Palotta.
GIovanni Battista Palotta, is of an honest family of the little Country of
Calderola nella Marca: He is Nephew to the late Cardinal Palotta, unto whom he
is no way inferior, and is well accommodated with the goods of fortune; for the
Cardinal his Uncle left him a great estate. Having put himself into the
Prelacie, he was by Urban the eighth exercised in diverse Charges, and in
particular was made Lord Governor of Rome, wherein he carried himself with much
integrity, and to the great satisfaction of the people, being severe, and so
upright, that in point of justice he made no reckoning of his Holiness
Nephews. For whereas it was the custom a little before the Carnival time to
make proclamation, that no woman whatsoever should during the said Carnival go
thorough the Course masked, on pain of being whipped, or suffering some such
other punishment, as to the Governor should seem meet, the famous Checa Buffona
was seen going in that time thorough the Course masked; and albeit she was
oftentimes admonished to forbear doing so, yet would she not desist. Whereat
Palotta being displeased, caused her suddenly to be imprisoned, and then
having ordained that she should be publicly whipped thorough the City, to
avoid the intercessions, that might be made to him in her behalf, he shut
himself up in his Cabinet, and gave order to his servants not to come at him,
or disturb him, during the space of two hours, for any cause, or message
whatsoever, but that they should in the mean time entertain those that came to
speak with him; whereupon arrived a Gentleman from Cardinal Antonio, who kept a
great coil to speak with the said Palotta, the Governor; but he was put of with
good words until the prefixed time was past, and then he was admitted to the
presence of the Governor, unto whom he brought an order from Cardinal Antonio,
for the speedy setting at liberty of the said Checa Buffona. Palotta answered,
that his Eminency should be obeyed, and presently made a Warrant for the
releasing of her out of prison; but when it came thither, Checa had already
been whipped thorough the City; which Antonio understanding, took on like a mad
man, and mightily threatened to be revenged. Palotta, foreseeing the danger he
was likely to incur, acquainted the Pope with the business, who commended him
for that he had done; but his Holiness, knowing well, that Antonio was
wreakful, and vindicative, to take away the inconvenience, that might arise
upon that occasion, deprived Palotta of his Government, and sent him Collector
into the Kingdom of Portugal; where having remained some months; he took upon
him to maintain certain Eccesiastical jurisdictions, and excommunicated all the
Royal Council of the City of Lisbon, for which he was forced to leap out of a
window to save himself by flight toward Rome; and there being arrived, he was
promoted to the Scarlet Gown for diverse respects. The first was, for the merit
of his labors, his Holiness knowing him to be a man of great abilities and
knowledge; and the second, for to shield him from the malice of Antonio, who
for all that, together with his brother Francesco, has given him hundreds of
disgusts, continually contrarying him in the cause and suite depending between
the General of the Augustinian Order, and the said Palotta, who desired to have
chastised him for diverse misdemeanors committed by him in his place; and
Antonio, to cross Palotta, protected and defended him, and in the end to
despite him, got him by an Apostolical brieve to be confirmed in the
Generalship for seven years more, besides many other abuses no way deserved by
the said Cardinal, who is a person capable of the Papacy, and Rome would be
happy if he should come to be Pope, that so it might see the pride of the
Barberini brought down. If he lives to some vacant Sea, he may attain
thereunto; for he is much esteemed of, and reputed very deserving by all the
Princes, unto whom his virtues, merits, and excellent qualities are well known;
besides, he is highly regarded by Innocent the tenth, the now reigning Pope;
but for his too free speech no small hatred was conceived against him by some
of his Holiness principal kindred; for he was one day desired by the Pope, to
tell him, what was said of him in Rome; and Palotta answered, Blessed Father,
all the City murmures at your Sister-in-law the Lady Olimpia 's too frequent
coming to, and abiding in the Palace; whereunto the Pope replied, well, we
will remedy it; and the next time Donna Olimpia came to him, he told her what
Palotta had said, and therefore desired her to forbear coming so often to the
Apostolical Palace. Hereupon Donna Olimpia took such a spleen against the said
Palotta, that meeting him upon a time, she drew the Curtain of her Caroach
against the very face of him; which Palotta seeing, begged leave of his
Holiness to go unto Calderola his Country, about some affairs that he had
there, and gave it out in the Court, that he went to visit the Fortress of
Marina nella Marca. His Votes, as well in the Congregations, as in the
Consistory, are greatly esteemed: He has no Enemy, nor any that is contrary to
him: He honors all, and where he can do any service, he does it willingly: he
is affable in entertainment, leads an holy and retired life, loves not light
conversations, and is very studious. He has many Nephews, whereof one is in
Flanders, another was a student in Bologna', where he slew a scholar that was
his Rival, for which his Uncle cares not much for him; but his darling is he
that is in the English College, who is a youth reasonably well learned, and
that in case he should become Pope, would be he that shall reign. This Cardinal
is not of any faction, but he is thought to be devoted to the House of Austria.

XXV. Theodoro Trivultio.
THeodoro Trivultio, of a most noble family of the City of Milan; he was a
Prince, and had a wife, by whom he had children; but after her death he
resigned his Principality to his eldest Son, and went to Rome, where putting
himself into the Prelacie, he bought the Clerk of the Chambers place, and after
some years he was promoted to the Scarlet Gown by Urban the eighth, both to
make money by the sale of that Office, and also to show that he would promote a
vassal of the Catholic King. This Cardinal merited the Hat as he was a
Prince, yet was he fain to make use of the Prelacie before he could attain unto
it. He is a good soldier, and is much beloved and reverenced by the King of
Spain, being reputed the most faithful Italian Vassal, that he has; for when
he sees that his Majesty's Ministers in the State of Milan do not behave
themselves with that fidelity as they ought, he speedily advertises the
Catholic King of it. He is not very rich, but is always supplied as he has
occasion by his said Majesty. At such time as he lived in the Court, after the
assumption of Innocent the tenth, he showed himself very bountiful, so far as
he was able; but he contracted many debts, which before his departure from the
Court he satisfied very punctually. He used to go up and down the City with a
great and stately train, but to speak without passion, there was much boast,
but little roast. He could not part from the Court so soon, as he purposed to
have done, for want of money, and therefore he was fain to stay the coming of
four thousand crowns from Naples which were sent him by the Viceroy: It is
thought he will not return again to the Court, before he has established some
good revenue for the maintaining of himself there. He is a Lord indifferently
well esteemed of in the Roman Court, full of resentment, very stirring, and
will talk enough, especially when the interest of Kings is in question;
wherefore he is much favored by their Ministers. He always keeps his promise,
being never worse then his word; he is very well accomplished, and lacks
nothing but the possibility of money.

XXVI. Steffano Durazzo.
STeffano Durazzo, a Noble man of Genoua, of the new Nobility; he put himself
into the Prelacie, and bought one after another both the Clerk of the Chambers,
and the Apostolical General Treasurors place, which he possessed but a little
time, for that he was promoted by Urban to the Scarlet Gown. His holiness
employed him in many Charges, and in particular, before the War, he sent him
Legate to the City of Ferrara; which Government he left, when as Antonio came
thither to the assistance of the Army, and went to his Archbishopric of
Genoua, from whence he never parted, but at such time, as upon the vacancie of
the Sea he repaired to the Conclave. He had a great deal of controversy about
the getting of that Archbishopric, but it was Urbans pleasure, that, in spite
of his competitors, he should enjoy it. In his Legateship of Ferrara he carried
himself very wisely, and to the satisfaction of those people, as the Citizens
themselves say, but he was not much Courted by the Nobility. He is a rich
Cardinal, because he is a Genouese, whose Wealth does multiply with
Merchandising. Whilst he was a Prelate he gamed away no small sums of money,
and spent little less upon Women. He is purblind, and squints with one eye. In
negotiating he is exceeding affable, but when the humor takes him, one must
leave off negotiating with him. He seems to be devoted to the House of
Austria, but indeed is wholly French, and holds but little esteem in the Court.

XXVII. Marc' Antonio Franciotti,
MArc' Antonio Franciotti, a principal Gentleman of the Commonwealth of Lucca;
he came to Rome, where putting himself into the Prelacie, he bought the Clerk
of the Chambers place, and afterward that also of the Auditor thereof; but
within a while he was by Urban promoted to the Scarlet Gown, and honored with
many worthy Charges, and in particular was created Bishop of Lucca, his
Country. He was sent Legate to Ravenna, and Romagna, where he was very well
regarded by that Nobility, and people. He grievously afflicted his Country,
for the cause which I will here now deliver. The brother of this Cardinal,
being one of the Ministers in the Government of the Commonwealth, was
discoverd to have plotted some such thing against his Country, as to have made
himself Master of it; and in particular, there were found in his house a great
many of Arms, not only common, but also prohibited; and the suspicion grew so
much the greater, by how much they are in that City exceeding vigilant, and
careful, to see that no man enters armed into it, not so much as with a knife:
Now the transgressors of this Law being always rigorously punished, the said
Cardinals brother was, together with his servants, committed to prison, where
being thoroughly examined and sifted, the treason which they had contrived was
made manifest in such manner, as they purposed within a short time to put them
all to death. The Cardinal finding no other way to repair the ruin of his
Family, had recourse unto Pope Urban, unto whom he recounted the matter, quite
otherwise, then as indeed it was, saying, that his brother was made a prisoner,
out of the hatred, and enmity, that the Nobles and Magistrates of Lucca bore
unto him; and that they had charged him with rebellion, because some of the
servants of the Bishops Palace were found Armed. Hereupon the Pope dispatched
away an express post with letters, that commanded them to set the Delinquents
at liberty; but the Commonwealth refusing to obey, his Holiness, seeing their
contumacy, interdicted, and excommunicated them; so that for a long time the
exercise of the Divine Offices were not used, the Church doors remaining
continually shut up. The Commonwealth published many protestations, and
writings, whereof they caused copies to be presented to all Christian Princes,
but it nothing availed them; wherefore in the end they were constrained to
yield unto the Popes power, and in this manner was the said Cardinals brother,
and all his accomplices set free. This Cardinal has good abilities, is
intelligent, and capable of the Papacy, but is not ripe enough for it. He is
poor, and much affected to the Crown of Spain, both he and all his House living
under the protection thereof. He is a wise man, and experimented in matters of
the Court; he is well esteemed of by the present Pope; in the sacred College
he has no Enemies of consideration, and is friend enough to the Barberini: he
may also with time break his Lance in Peter's chair.

XXVIII. Federico Carpegna.
FEderico Carpegna, a Noble man of the City of Vrbin: He was a poor Prelate;
but Barberino having made use of him in some affairs of his, was so pleased
with his carriage therein, that he took an affection to him, and at his
instance he was by the Pope promoted to the Scarlet Gown, and therefore he is,
and always will be faithful and affected to them. The Count Carpegna, his
brother, continually assisted in the War of Urban against the Princes of
Italy. This Cardinals endowments are mean, but he is able for business, and he
may one day have some hope in the common pretensions of the Scarlet Gowns, if
the Barberini do not spoil his promotion, because he is too much their servant.
His vote will ever be, as that of the Barberini is, and therefore in time to
come he will always be French; besides the affection he has still born to
that Crown, although he makes no open profession thereof. He is a man studious,
melancholic, and somewhat charitable. He has many brothers, whereof the Count
is one, and another is a Canon of Santa Maria in Via lata.

XXIX. Frencesco Maria Brancaccio.
FRancesco Maria Brancaccio, a Neopolitan Cavalier; he was Bishop of the City
of Capuccio in the Kingdom of Naples, where by reason of certain Ecclesiastical
jurisdictions, he fell into some difference with a Spanish Captain of foot, who
was sent unto that City by the Viceroy of Naples, and passing from words to
blows, he caused him to be killed by a bardash of his with a musket shot; for
which Brancaccio was cited to appear before the Viceroy, to render an account
of the manslaughter committed by him. Brancaccio obeying, went to Naples; but
the very same night he came thither, that he might not put himself into the
secular power of the Royal Court, he stole away in a felouque, and fled
toward Rome; where being arrived, he imparted the whole matter unto Urban the
eighth, who for the hate that he bore to the Spaniards, not only commended him
for that he had done, but also defended him. Which the Viceroy seeing, caused
all his goods, and the revenues of his Bishopric to be sequestered; so that
this Prelate remained in Rome in such necessity and misery, as he could hardly
make shift to live; but after that his process was compiled, and that the Pope
had absolved him, he craved leave to return unto the residence of his Church,
although the Kings Ministers had expressly forbidden him so to do, saying,
that his Catholic Majesty desired of the Pope another Prelate for that City,
and had withal ordained, that the inhabitants thereof should not permit him to
enter into the possession of it, upon pain of rebellion. It was the fortune of
this Lord, that whilst he was leaving the Court, and departing to his
residence, the Pope was upon the point of promoting Cardinals, with an intent
to give the Hat unto my Lord Pier Luigi Caraffa, Bishop of Tricario; and to my
Lord Caraffa, Bish, of Aversa, but both their promotions were hindered by the
Colonnesi; the Barberini too pressed their Uncle to confer the Scarlet Gown on
Serlupi their Cousin; but his holiness being molested and vexed with these
controversies, would needs make the proverb good: Inter duos litigantes tertius
gaudet, and in stead of the rest made Brancaccio Cardinal. Others say, that he
promoted him to despite the Spaniards, by whom he was exceedingly hated, to
the end that as a Prince of the holy Church he might be honored, and upon
restoring of him to his Bishopric, he might also be reverenced. A little after
his departure to the residence of his said Church, and upon his arrival at
Naples, he found two other Cardinals there, namely Aldobrandino, and
Boncompagno; the one of them being come thither to have his part in the
tiltings, hunting, and other festivals, which in that City were to be made for
some victories of Spain, and for the birth of a Son of the Kings; and the other
was Archbishop of Naples. Brancaccio having continued there some months, the
Count of Monte-Rei, at that time Viceroy of that Kingdom, presented him with
a paper from his Catholic Majesty, whereby he enjoined him to depart with
all speed, not only from Naples, but also quite out of the whole Kingdom;
insomuch that the poor Cardinal was forced to get him away in all have toward
Rome, with all his family: Which Urban seeing, moved with indignation against
the Spaniards, and with compassion to the Cardinal, he conferred the Bishopric
of Viterbo on him, and giving him many Pensions, he not long after bestowed on
his Vicar the Bishopric of Aramo in Regno. This Cardinal is much obliged to
the Barberini; but in the Conclave, that he might not damnifie his kinsmen, he
showed himself affected to the Crown of Spain, and gave his vote to the
Albernoz; with which stratagem, and to free himself from his obligation, he
does seek to draw unto him his kinsmen, and Nephews, and accordingly has
already begun so to do, having married one of them to one of the house of the
Ursini. He is not well looked upon by Innocent the tenth, nor the Pamphilian
family, for that he has inconsiderately manifested himself too much
interressed in certain differences about territories, between some of his
Church, and others, the creatures of Donna Olimpia, in the City of Vitenbo. His
Nephew, being Governor of Spoleti, was deprived thereof, and never since has
had any charge at all. To conclude, this Cardinal is poor, and proud.

XXX. Rinaldo d'Este.
RInaldo d'Este, a Modenese, and brother to the Duke of Modena: This Prince was
promoted to the Scarlet Gown at the instance of the Emperor by Urban the
eighth; after which promotion the war of Italy fell out between the Duke of
Parma, and the Barberini; in regard whereof, though all differences were wholly
composed, yet has he still showed himself an enemy to the Barberini, and
therefore in all the time that they reigned, he would never come to take the
Hat, which afterward he received from the hands of Innocent the tenth, being
present in the conclave at his election. Some months being past, the said
Cardinal took notice, that the Austrians made diverse Congregations about the
interest of that Crown in the Palace of Albernoz, whereunto his Eminency was
never called nor invited, as if they accounted him altogether indiffident: now
one day there was a consistory to be held concerning the interest of Portugal,
wherein some course was to be taken for the provision of those Churches in the
name of that King; and the Spanish Ministers had by the Catholic Kings order
forbidden all the Cardinals of their faction from going to it: especially the
Cardinal of Este was by the Duke of Savelli, the Emperors Ambassador,
advised by no means to come at it; but he would not obey giving him this for
an answer; That as the Spaniards had esteemed his person of no consideration in
their Congregations, so his presence would be of as little consideration in the
Consistory, and therefore he would go unto it. Upon this occasion then he
openly declared himself distasted with the Spaniards, and he had a brieve
granted to him for the protection of the Kingdom of France; whereupon this
Cardinal of Este published a manifest, containing the reasons he had for his
declaring himself French, which was answered by the Spaniards, and replied
unto by the Cardinal; who took down the Austrian Arms from his Palace, and
in the place thereof set up the most Christian Kings. This Este began to defend
the interest of the Barberini, because they had offered him the Abbacie of
Honantala, whereunto he made some claim; wherefore the Pope said one day unto
him these words: My Lord, I see you labor much to protect the Barberini, and I
do not know the cause of such a mutation, for you always contraried them
heretofore, and now you stand for them; but I veri^y believe you do it out of
interest, for that they will resign unto you the Abbacie, whereunto you have
so long pretended, or for some other end; howsoever know, that though it be in
them to resign it, the passing of the Brieve thereof is in us. Este hearing
this, thus answered; I do not pretend, blessed Father, to defend the Barberini
for any interest of mine, but to supplicate your Holiness for just things:
wherefore when as my abiding at court shall be displeasing unto you, to give
you satisfaction I will be gone. To this the Pope said without any other reply,
Be you blessed; which in plain terms is as much as to say, God be with you;
and at the same instant the Cardinal getting into a Caroach with six horses
went to Caprarola, and from thence to Modena his Country. Afterward Este
understanding that the Admiral of Castile was come to Rome as Ambassador
extraordinary from the Catholic King, to yield obedience to the Pope, and
that he had declared he would visit all the Cardinals, except him the said
Este, he repaired again to the Court; where, by reason of diverse differences
that fell out between him and that Ambassador, they came to arms, and waged,
what on the one side, and what on the other, above six hundred persons; so that
there was a great combustion in Rome, and some daily slain, as is more amply
delivered in a little printed relation thereof: but the Pope raised men to
suppress this tumult, and so it was quieted by the means of certain
interposing Princes; but first this poor Lord, for the maintayning of his
soldiers, was fain to pawn his jewels to the Cardinal Queva for the sum of
two and twenty thousand crowns, by reason the money which he expected from
France came not time enough to him, and for that the Duke his brother could not
supply him sufficiently, in regard his state was much exhausted by the former
war with the Barberini. This Cardinal is bountiful enough, but his purse
fails him, and will not permit him to do as he would do: he is of a good
life, very conversable, merry, and friendly.

XXXI. Francesco Peretti.
FRancesco Peretti, alias Cardinal Montalto, he is the Nephews Son of Sixtus
quintus of happy memory. This Lord was the only son of the Prince Peretti,
who, being old, proposed to give a wife to Francesco, that was in love with a
Lady of the House of Cesi, wherewith he acquainted his father, who put him in
good hope, and accordingly went, treated and concluded the marriage, not for
his Son, but for himself, for the old dotard being infinitely taken with the
Angelical sight of a most beautiful Lady, thought her more fitter for
himself, than for his son. Francesco, seeing he was in this sort betrayed,
and ill entreated by his Father, departed in a manner desperate, and secretly,
from the Court, and made himself a Priest; by which means the father
deceasing not long after without heirs, and all his States falling to
Francesco, upon his death the family of the Peretti will be extinct. This Lord
used much diligence to get the Scarlet Gown, but could not attain it, because
Urban was displeased with him, for that he would neither give, nor sell unto
him the delicious Villa of Mentana. Montalto would not give it unto him, least
the World should say, that so deserving a person as himself attained to the Hat
by briberie; and so was contented rather to be without it. The most part of the
States he possesses, are situated in the Kingdom of Naples; for which cause
he is devoted to the Catholic Crown, and has many times supplied that
Majesty with money for the service of his Wars. Hs is Prince of the City of
Venafro, and Count of Celano, enjoying also many places in the State of the
Church: The King of Spain did oftentimes desire the Scarlet Gown of Pope Urban
for this Lord, but was by him continually refused; at length being earnestly
pressed by the King of France, who demanded it also for Giulio Mazzarini, the
Pope, that he might not seem to be too much affected to the French, did at one
and the same time promote both Mazzarino, and Montalto, as declared Nationals,
and nominated by France and Spain. He is a rich Lord, and bountiful, keeps a
Royal Court, and little cares what he spends, knowing well that after his
decease his estate is to fall unto diverse Families, and in part cular to the
Savelli, as his nearest kindred. Sixtus quintus made a Bull, wherein he
declared, that the Scarlet Gown should be given to his descendants without any
demand or instance at all; and indeed the Roman Church can ow no less to that
blood of his, seeing it has received so many benefits from that worthy high
Bishop of eternal memory. All the Popes indevoured, but Sixtus quintus alone
settled the Papal power, reduced unto obedience all the Barons, how great and
potent soever they were, rooted the Banditi, and thieves out of the
Ecclesiastical State, bridled the Christian Princes, in a few years adorned
Rome with sumptuous fabrics, and enriched the Adrian Mole with a huge sum of
Gold, intending to perform some great enterprise, which succeeded not by reason
of his ensuing death. This Cardinal holds good correspondence with all the
sacred College, except it be with the Cardinal Trivultio his kinsman; for
there fell ought some difference between them in the past Conclave, because the
said Trivultio had heard, that Montalto was united with the French faction; but
now, it is thought, they are reconciled. He is much esteemed of by the Pope, is
well conditioned, studious, learned, and worthy of the Papacy for his
goodness, and excellent qualities. He is of kin to very near all the Roman
Nobility, and was not long since honored by the Catholic King with the
charge of conducting the Emperors Daughter, his new Spouse, out of Germany into
Spain; in which employment the Cardinal stood not upon expense, but showed
himself exceeding splendid and liberal.

XXXII. Giulio Mazzarini.
GIulio Mazzarini, the Son of Pier Mazzarini, a Sicilian, who being a
Merchant, became bankrupt for certain sums of money, and therefore fled with
all his family to Rome, where the said Giulio was born, as also his brother,
named Michael; who made himself a Friar of the Dominican Order. Giulio served
for sometime the Colonnesies Nephews, and afterward Sachetti, who employed
him in the managing of his moneys; wherewith trading for his Master, and with
gaming, he got together no little sums for himself: Then he became a soldier;
but returning again to the Court, he applied himself anew to the same
Cardinals. The affection which Sachetti bore to this man, brought him into such
esteem with the Cardinal Antonio, as he employed him in all his services, and
putting himself into the Prelacie, he was, at his instance, sent by the Pope
Nuncio Apostolical into Savoy, and also to take in his Holiness name, out of
the hands of the French, the City of Casale, to be kept by him in deposito,
till such time as the Spantards, and Germans should go out of, and leave the
City of Mantoua, which they had seized upon, because the Duke thereof had
declared himself French, and would not acknowledge to hold of the Emperor.
Mazzarini goes accordingly, and takes the City of Casale in deposito, but after
he had caused the Spaniards, and Germans to issue out of Mantoua, he gave
Casale again unto the French; by means whereof both the Emperor, and the King
of Spain remained flouted, and cheated; and from this difference sprung the
bloody War in the State of Milan, and Monferrato. The said Mazzarini, by this
treason done unto the Spaniards, got the favor of the Cardinal Richelieu,
together with that of the most Christian King; who finding him to be a man of a
wit proper for the designs of his Crown, demanded the purple Gown of the Pope
for him, in reward of the betraying the King of Spain his Lord, whose Vassal he
is. Urban at that time denied to give it him, because he had also deceived him,
in consigning the City of Casale anew into the hands of the French, without his
knowledge; and answered the most Christian King, that he would grant it unto
him for any other person that he would nominate: But his Majesty persisted
still with great obstinacy in that his demand; which Urban seeing, could do no
less then content him, and in this manner was he promotd to the Scarlet Gown.
After the decease of the Cardinal Richelieu, he had the whole Command; but his
Masters favor got him much hatred with the Grandees of the Kingdom. His
Majesty greatly honored him; made him a Councellor of State, with authority to
sit in Parliament; and also at his death left him one of the Executors of his
Testament. This Cardinal is grown so rich, that he is held to be the wealthiest
feuditary Prince that is. He had often craved leave of that King to return unto
Rome, and take the Hat at such time as Urban lived, but it would never be
granted to him. He has been so high in the Court of France, that the Princes
of the blood could by no means endure it; which has been the cause of such
revolutions in that Kingdom, and of such intestine Wars as have followed
thereupon; but this matter is so well known to every one, that I will pass
from it, to discourse of that, which further concerns him. This Cardinal is
he, that, though a far off, did in the Conclave so oppose the election of
Innocent the tenth; and not contented therewith, labored also to terrify him,
by sending great armies into Italy; the operations whereof has manifested to
the World, that the Cardinal had indeed other thoughts, then the sole
acquisition of Piombino. The Catholic King has declared him, and all his
kindred Rebels and Traitors. At such time, as this Cardinal served in the
Wars, he was a very vicious gamster, and oftentimes received many hurts about
women; but now he lives with much gravitie, and whosoever has to deal with
him, finds him always in appearance, gentle in speech, and grateful for
benefits received, wherefore he has openly defended Barberino, so far forth,
that he has incurred the hatred of the Parliament of Paris for it. With his
authority he caused his brother, being in a manner but a youth, to be elected
General of the Order of the Dominicans, made him Master of the sacred Palace,
procured him the Archbishopric of Aix in France, and finally not contented
herewith, he obtained the Scarlet Gown for him; with all which honors the said
Michael is past into a better life.

XXXIII. Marc' Antonio Bragadino.
MArc' Antonio Bragadino, a Nobleman of Venice: he was made Bishop of the City
of Vicenza, upon the nomination of the Republique, which knew him to be a good
man, and of great integrity. This Bishopric of his enjoyes the title of Duke,
Marquess, and Count. All the time of his residence at his Church he was held
in great esteem, and lived with great reputation; I my self have often seen him
in that City, as he was going with his Clergy to the Domo, and me thought, that
even then he showed, and looked like a Cardinal, as within less then two years
after he was made one, at the instance of the Signoria of Venice, which highly
account of him. He is a Lord endowed with many excellent qualities, is very
courteous in salutes, and entertainments, loves not light conversations, is a
man studious, and curious; but his curiosity ceases, when matters of interest
are handled. All the time, that he was at Court, he was never seen to give any
alms, for which he was blamed; but it may well be, that he delights to give in
secret, that he may not appear vainglorious. This Cardinal cannot be Pope in
have, for two reasons; the one is, because he is a Venetian, and the other is
because he is too young. He is not devoted to any Crown, but only to his
Republique, and his vote will be always at the disposing thereof.

XXXI. Pietro Donato Cesis.
PIetro Donato Cesis, of a most Noble Roman Family; he was Clerk of the
Chamber, was also made Treasuror General of the holy Church, and afterward
promoted by Urban to the Scarlet Gown, and sent by him Legate to Perugia, at
such time as the War was made against the Princes of Italy. The Apostolical
Chamber, whilst he had the administration of it, was well served, and not
oppressed, as it had been by so many others, which robbed it. In this said
Legateship he carried himself very wisely, but with rigor. He is a man of a good
and sincere life, and may be one day Pope, being a Roman. He has no hair on
his Chin, so that he seems to be an Eunuch; and coming to be greyhaired, he
would look like one of those ancient Popes; and not without cause was there a
Pasquil made of him during the Vacancie of the Sea, which said; Cesis is made
Pope, verily he will be a Pope de Malangonate. He would be no bad Pope, for
that he is a lover of the poor, and a man of conscience. He is learned, and
naturally merry in conversation. He was Abbot of the Abbey of Saint Angelo a
Sazanella in the Kingdom of Naples. He is much devoted to the house of Austria,
and in particular to the Catholic King, making open profession thereof; and
having his Majesty's arms set over his gate; and is loved and esteemed of that
Crown, as also of the great Duke. He is not much reckoned of in the Court, but
is reverenced in the sacred College. He has no enemies, except it be the
Barberini, who fear him for the abuses they have done to the Duke of Cesis,
besides other disgusts received in his own person from them. There has some
distaste also past between him and the Cardinal Theodoli, in a Chapel held by
the Cardinals for the love of Lerida. His Government would be good for the holy
Church; for some of his confidents have reported, that if ever he should attain
to that degree, he would with all his interest make a league against the Turk;
and would also, if God gave himlise, lay up as many millions of Gold in the
Castle, as Sixtus quintus did, for the benefit of the Apostolic Sea. His
kindred are the Orsini, the Duke Acquasparta, the Duke of Cesis, the Soovelli,
and others.

XXXV. Francesco Maria Machiavelli,
FFrancesco Maria Machiavelli, a Noble man of Florence, and Cousin to the
Barberini. He was a first but a simple Prelate, then was made Bishop of
Ferrara, and afterward promoted to the Scarlet Gown for diverse reasons, but
the most intimate of them was, because he was a kin to the Barberini by the
mothers side; another was, for that the Cavalier Matthia Machiavelli, who was
Captain of the light horse of his Holiness guard, and had done many services
for the Pope in the past War against the Princes of Italy, was an earnest
suitor to him for it. This Cardinal is very affable in his demeanor, of a good
disposition, courteous, and a friend to the poor, but yet spends not much upon
them of his own purse. He is not disliked of by the great Duke of Toscan,
though he be the Barberinies Cousin, because he has never distasted that
Prince, but has held good correspondence with him by all manner of services,
if not openly, at leastwise secretly, for otherwise he had lost the Popes
favor. He is neither Spanish nor French, feigning himself neutral, but in
effect is wholly Austrian; and in the past Conclave he always sided with
Albernoz against Francesco. He was not displeased to see the Barberini
persecuted by the Pope, knowing their misdeanors deserved that, and worse. He
is well regarded by his holiness, and is now resident at his Church of Ferara.
He is a man of an indifferent understanding, has no considerable enemies, nor
any contrariety, but such as he may have by reason of his affinity with the
Barberini: he is of a goodly presence, and young; he maintains himself in his
Bishopric with much decorum and gravitie, carrying himself with the great
satisfaction of the people there, by whom he is loved, reverenced and served.

XXXVI. Verginio Orsini.
Verginio Orsini, a Roman, Nephew to the Duke of Bracciano, and the brother of
the Duke of Santo Gemini; he was only an Abbot, and thought to have cast off
his Clerical habit, and have married the Princess Lodovisia: but Urban, envying
this match, and whilst it was a making up, promoted him in a Consistory to the
Scarlet Gown. Others say, that the Duke of Bracciano, finding his house without
the red Hat, courted the Cardinal Antonio a long time with donatives, and
exorbitant expenses; and in the end, with a great sum of Gold drew him to get
his Holiness to promote him: howsoever the Scarlet Gown was due to him, as a
deserving Lord, and of a most ancient family, which, as one may say, has had
as many Cardinals as days; and the Roman Church is exceedingly obliged to this
house, their ancestors having fought for it, and kept the Barbarians far enough
from Rome; maintaining the Apostolical Sea in all security. This House, as
also that of the Colonnesi alone, have a place with the Ambassadors in the
Chapel, but in regard of precedencie they never meet there both together. This
Cardinal according to his authority is not very rich; no more than his
ancestors were, who warred a long time with the Colonnesi, in such sort as they
put not only the neighboring Princes in fear, but also the very Popes
themselves, who were fain to observe them; but they have now reduced them to
that pass, as the Orsini may with just reason say, sastiditum in ques, and
opprebrium gentibus, and abjectio plebis; howsoever this Lord is bountiful, as
far forth as his small ability will extend, carrying along with him the
liberality of his race. He was much beloved and regarded of Innocent the
tenth, because at such time as the assuming of Cardinal Pamphilio to the
Papacy was in agitation, he being not entered into the Conclave, by reason of
some indisposition of his, when there was need of his vote, he presently
entered, and gave it for him; the said Orsini too were great furtherers of the
match between his holiness Niece and the Prince Lodovisio: Nevertheless at
this present, the French having deprived the Prince Lodovisio of the
Principality of Piombino, the said Orsini endeavor all that ever they may to
obtain it, for that the Duke of Braccianoes Wife is of the Appian house, from
whom the Spaniards formerly took away the said Principality, and sold it to
the Prince Lodovisio for the sum of five hundred thousand Crowns, being worth
threescore thousand a year. The Orsini were heretofore devoted to the house of
Austria, but now have declared themselves French, insomuch that the Duke of
Bracciano and the Cardinal have set up the Arms of the most Christian King,
from whom they have a Pension of two and twenty thousand Crowns a year;
besides the Duke of Bracciano continually expects the Brieve of the.
Investiture of Piombino: For which cause it is believed, that the friendship
and familiarity, which has been between Innocent the tenth and them, will
turn into hatred and difference, and all-ready there is a beginning thereof;
for his holiness has caused the Duke of Bracciano to be cited, to make payment
of his debts to the Montisti his Creditors, otherwise threatening to make sale
of his goods to satisfy them. This Cardinal is a man proud enough, and for
matter of precedence, he, by making stay of his Caroach, affronted and ill
entreated the family of the Resident of the deceased Queen Mother, Maria de
Medici. He is a Lord full of resentment, and Vindicative, and therefore is
feared in the Court, and reverenced in the College.

XXXVII. Giulio Gabrielli.
GIulio Gabrielli, a Roman Nobleman: he was Clerk of the Chamber, and was
promoted to the Scarlet Gown by Urban the eighth, for the making of money by
sale of that Office; and afterward was sent, as it were in exile, unto a
miserable Bishopric, charged with pensions, in the City of Ascoli; the
greatest part of his means he acknowledges from the house of Lancelloti. He
has received many disgusts from Barberino, yet can he not for all that
separate himself from him. He seems to be devoted to the house of Austria, but
is internally French. He is an intelligent man, studious, curious, and affable
in his dealing. He is a poor Cardinal, and therefore give not much alms. He is
but young, in regard whereof nothing is to be said of him concerning the
Papacy. He is well qualified, leads a retired life, has no enemies in the
sacred College, and in the Court carries a good port; he has some Nephews,
which are of no ill condition. He is a kin to diverse Noble Roman Families,
and in particular to the Altieri, Lancelloti, and Coccini. This Cardinal has
in his Bishopric been at some variance with the people thereof, insomuch that
they rose up tumultuously against him, about some taxes imposed by him upon
them.

XXXVIII. Ascanio Filomarini.
AScanio Filomarini, a Neapolitan Cavalier, born in a little Village subject to
Benevento, called Chianchisella: He was so poor, that to repair the misery he
was in, he resolved to go, and serve some Cardinal in the Court of Rome; where
being arrived, he addressed himself to a Cardinal, his Countriman, and friend,
to the end that with his authority he might be preferred to the place of
Master of the Chamber, to some person that was capable of the Papacy; but he
to gull him, rather then otherwise, recommended him to Barberino, that was not
in a predicament of being Pope, who entertained him for Master of his Chamber;
and it was his fortune to have the same inclination, that his Lord had; both of
them delighted in Astrology; for which cause Maffeo carried the greater
affection unto him. In process of time Gregory the fifteenth happened to die,
and after long contestation in the Conclave amongst the Cardinals of several
(...) factions they elected the said Maffeo Barberino for Pope, by the name of
Urban the eighth; who after he had promoted Francesco Barberino his Nephew, to
the Scarlet Gown, appointed the said Fidomarini to be his superintendant, with
the Title of Master of his Chamber, and authority to wear purple; in regard
Francesco was by reason of his youth too unapt, and not fit for the Government.
Barberino, some time being past, not able longer to endure to see himself under
the charge of the Master of his Chamber, began to withdraw himself from it with
the greatest arrogancy, that might be; and had indeed driven him out of his
Court, had it not been for the Pope, his Uncle, who protected him: howsoever he
would not make use of him in any thing, but about the Chamber. Filomarini,
having served the Popes house for the space of ten years, resolved to try his
fortune, to see if he could get the Scarlet Gown, because it had been often
promised to him by his holiness, but it little availed him; wherefore when he
saw that the Pope had made many promotions, and that he was still excluded, he
began to fall from the hope, which continually he had of it. The truth is, that
Urban had an intent to promote him; but he was by Francesco with a malicious
policy kept from it; for he would say to his holiness, Father, Filomarini is
to me a right hand for the Government of my affairs, and I shall not be able to
meet with such another, as he is; wherefore you may be pleased to prefer him
some other time; and this he did always at such time, as the promotions were
to be made, more for the hate that he bore him, then for any other end, hoping
that by means of this suspension, his Uncle coming to die, he should not see
a servant of his exalted to the same Dignity that he was in. The
Archbishopric of Naples becoming void by the death of the Cardinal
Buoncompagno, Filomarini, seeing that four and twenty years were already past,
and he had not been remunerated with any thing, determined to craveit for a
reward of his labors, as indeed he did, saying, Blessed Father, I have long
served your Holiness, and your House, and never had any occasion to demand any
grace of you, till now, that the Church of Naples is void, which I humbly
beseech your Holiness to bestow on me; And this he spoke even with tears in
his eyes, because he had lost all hope of the Scarlet Gown: the Pope, to make
himself merry with him, answered him thus; This is not a morsel for you, my
Ascanio, but for a Cardinal; and we have already so destinaled it: Which
Filomarini hearing, made no reply, but shrinking up his shoulders took his
leave. Not long after this Urban communicated unto Francesco the promotion of
the Cardinals, which he meant to make, and in particular of Filomarini; but
Francesco, having used all the persuasions he might to divert him from it, and
not prevailing, resolved to give him all the disgusts in the mean time, that
possibly he could; and for a beginning, one day when Barberino was going forth
into the City, Filomarini brought his cloak, as he was wont, to put it on him;
but Francesco in a rage snatched it out of his hand, saying, you shall serve me
no longer, and turning him about to another Gentleman of his there present, he
gave it to him, and said, you shall serve me hereafter for the Master of my
Chamber: which Filomarini seeing and hearing, remained as one dead, to find
himself so disgraced by his Lord, saying in his mind; Is this my Guerdon for so
many years service, which I have done to the Pope, and his Nephews? cursed be
he which trusts in the deceitful hopes of the World. Now the monday morning
came, appointed for the sitting of the Consistory, where preparation being made
for things necessary thereunto, Filomarini also began to go about, as he used
to do at other times; but Barberino with bitter words commanded him to get him
from that place: as he did, retiring to his lodging very melancholic, and
exceedingly cast down. The time of the Consistory being come, which lasted six
whole hours together, his holiness in the beginning propounded the
Archbishopric of Naples for Filomarim, and afterward together with many
others, promoted him to the Scarlet Gown. The Consistory being finished, there
was heard, according to the usual custom, crying out, long live Cardinal such
a one: Filomarini, who knew nothing of that which had past, desirous to hear
somewhat, went out of his lodging, and presently met with some Prelates and
Cardinals, which did all reverence unto him, saying, your Eminencies servant,
my Lord Cardinal Ascanio; he thinking he was mocked, answered each of them, I
had as lieve be flouted by you as another: but at length Barberino himself was
forced to go to him, and give him the Title of Eminency: Filomarini hearing
what he, and the rest had said unto him, began to come to himself again, and
call to mind the Popes words, when he told him, that it was not a morsel for
him, and that he had destinated it to a Cardinal. This Lord got the Hat with
the sweat of four and twenty years service; and in the last Conclave, he met
sufficiently with Barberino, when as he told him, that his obligation for the
Scarlet Gown was due to the good memory of Urban, and that he being dead, his
obligation was also extinct, knowing well, that he had always opposed him in
his attaining to the Hat, and that therefore he was obliged to give his vote
for the Catholic King his Lord. Urban took the greater affection to this
Cardinal, because when he was grievously sick in his last infirmity, he had
demanded of his Physician in what state of health his holiness was, and being
put in good hope thereof by him, he gave him a chain of Gold, which the
Physician showed to the Pope; who thereby perceiving the love he bore to him,
promoted him afterward to the Scarlet Gown. In the time of the War of the
Barberini, he sent twelve thousand Piastre to the relief of the Papal Army, for
which he got no little credit with the Pope, and sacred College. He is a very
intelligent man, and given to Astrology, but is exceeding proud; so that in
regard thereof, there is no Cavalier how mean soever, that Courts and visits
him: And I well remember, that the Countess of Saponara at such time as he was
Master of the Chamber to Barberino, sent him certain letters, superscribed with
the Title of my Lord, and because they had not the Title of most illustrious,
he returned them back, saying, that they were not sent unto him; and as much he
did, when as he was illustrious, saying, that they were not directed to him: in
sum, no man knows, how to negotiate with him, and therefore every one
abstaines from writing unto him.

XXXIX. Gieronimo Verospi.
GIeronimo Verospi, a Roman Gentleman; He was Auditor della Rota, as in like
manner his Uncle had been, who during the time of his being so, faling at odds
with the great Duke of Toscan, madly undertook with certain Musketeers to
dispute the difference that was between them about some waters, without
regarding the danger of his life, that hung over his head; after which
returning to Rome, he was by Urban thought worthy of the Scarlet Gown; and
having obtained it, he lived but a while, for some disgusts that were given him
broke his heart, and so he dyed. Urban, after the death of that Cardinal,
seeing his house as it were ruined and undone, and bearing a great affection to
it, promoted the present Geronimo Verospi his Nephew to the Hat; he conferred
also upon him the Church of Osimo nella Marca, and further confirmed the
Auditors place della Rota on his brother, besides many other benefits and
graces. Francesco and Antonio both made great suite to have the Scarlet Gown as
well for Verospi as for Gabrieli, because they were but small friends to
Pamphilio, and as such, they showed themselves obstinate against his election;
and therefore after his assumption the said Verospi has always absented
himself from the Court, to avoid those disgusts which might happen unto him,
residing continually at his Bishopric. He is a poor Cardinal, and has many
brothers, who all live together with their Mother, except it be one which has
ever kept himself apart from the rest; and after the death of Urban he went to
serve Cardinal Antonio in the place of Master of his Chamber, before he left
the Court of Rome to go into France. This Cardinal is learned, but the Auditor
della Rota his brother is more intelligent; his vote will be altogether for the
Barberini, and his inclination is more to France then to Spain, although, to
maintain himself in the common pretensions, he seems in appearance to be
neutral. If this same Lord should be Pope, he would spoil the seat of Peter to
accommodate his brethren, which are many.

XL. Gaspare Matthei.
GAspare Matthei, brother to the Duke of that surname; He was a Prelate of a
most Noble and ancient Roman family; and was sent by Urban the eighth Nuneio to
the Emperors Majesty; in which Charge he carried himself with much
satisfaction of both parts. He was promoted to the Scarlet Gown, as other
Nuncioes were: Upon his return to Rome he was presently set upon by Sachetti
for the repayment of six thousand crowns, lent him at his going into Germany,
causing him to be cited for it, in regard whereof he is no great friend to him,
but greatly opposed his fortune in the Conclave, and behaved himself with much
vigilancie, care, and affection toward the House of Austria, in favor of the
Cardinal Phamphilio: And he it was also that made a great coil, saying, they
would have no foreign, but Roman Popes; and in the same Conclave he defended
the reputation of the house of Austria, threatening the Cardinal Rapacioli, who
had spoken amiss against the Austrians; he showed himself also averse to the
Cardinal Fiorenzola for the same cause. This Cardinal is poor, intelligent,
opinnative, haughty, proud, full of resentment, and looks more like a soldier
then a Cardinal: He speaks freely against any one whatsoever he be, when he
sees things ill done, His vote is, and ever will be Austrian, and for that
Crown would he shed his own blood. He is well esteemed of by the Pope, and
feared of the Court, as a vindicative person. He has allied himself with the
house of Gonzaga, having given his Sister in marriage to the Prince of Pozzolo,
who was heretofore Ambassador in this Court from the Emperor.

XLI. Girolamo Grimaldi.
GIrolamo Grimaldi, a Nobleman of Genoua, and kinsman to the Prince of
Montehonorato. This Girolamo was a soldier, having served the Emperor in the
Wars of Germany; returning into his Country he put on the long robe, and
coming to Rome, he bought the Clerk of the Chambers place, was by Urban the
eighth made Governor of Rome, in which Charge he carried himself with much
satisfaction of the people; at the end whereof he was sent Nuntio into France,
and having remained some months in that employment, he was promoted to the
Scarlet Gown for two respects; the one was to make the Clerk of the Chambers
place void for the selling of it; and the other, to show the promoting of a
French Nuntio. Some say that this Lord was he which caused the Prince of Monaco
to fall from the Spaniards; but others more certainly say, that it was a French
Cavalier, named Mounsieur Bordon, of the self same House of Grimaldi; for there
are in France many of that Family, so that it cannot be denied but that the
Cardinal had an hand in it. And the cause of this defection was, for that the
Kings Ministers would not pay the Garrison which was kept in the fortress of
Monaco; in regard whereof the poor Prince, having no possibility to pay them,
by reason he was not satisfied those few assignments which had been settled for
it, was forced to expel the Spaniards, and introduce the French, as most
profitable for him, restoring to the Catholic King his Golden Fleece again.
This Cardinal is well accommodated with the goods of fortune, and yet he cannot
be said to be rich, if one consider the bountifullnesse of his mind, which is
such, as his means, though sufficient enough, is not able to answer. In his
negotiating and dealings he is very affable and courteous, honoring all without
exception of any. He lives under the protection of the Crown of France, as all
his kindred besides does. He is intelligent enough, and studious, but much more
curious. The most Christian King honored him for some months with his
comprotection of France, in default of Antonioes absence from the Court, it
having been exercised before by Cardinal Brichi; and now it is exercised by the
Cardinal of Este, with the Title of Legitimate Protector, for which he has
received a Brieve from his Majesty. Grimaldi got but little favor with the
Pope in the time that he exercised the said comprotection, having too openly
spoken overmuch in the behalf of the Barberini; in regard whereof his
Holiness, before the Cardinal of Estes arrival at Rome, oftentimes denied him
audience. He is very open in the expression of his sense, especially when he
comes to have any business imposed upon him. He is of some account in the
Court, because he is of a principal Family, and a Nobleman of the City of
Genoua. He is not a little glad at any loss, or misadventure happening to the
Austrian Monarchy, and in particular to that of Spain. He is an amiable Lord,
merry, and jovial; is well pleased with the delights of the World, and
especially with fair Women. He is much esteemed of by the Crown of France.

XLII. Cesare Fachinetti.
CEsare Fachinetti, Nephew to Innocent the ninth, and a Nobleman of Bologna; he
was a deserving Prelate, and sent Nuncio to the Catholic King; at the end of
which employment he was promoted to the Scarlet Gown by Urban the eighth, and
afterward had conferred on him the Bishopric of Sinigaglia, a City of the
State of Urbin. In his Church he was observed to be a good and vigilant man,
behaving himself gently and charitably toward his flock. None of the Cardinals
in the sacred College are enemies to him, because he is loving to them all. He
is not very old, but coming to some riper age he may attain to Peter's Chair;
the rather for that he is devoted to the house of Austria; he has no vices of
consideration; holds good correspondence with the Popes Family. The Spaniards
would condescend to his election, so that it might be propounded by some head
of a faction; for if they should do it themselves, he might be easily excluded.
He would be no bad Pope for the good of the Church. Innocent the tenth has
conferred on his brother the Charge of Governor of the Arms in Romagna; who in
case of his being Pope, would be he that will reign, and has no considerable
defect, saving that he is somewhat amorous, being now in love with one Nina
Barcarola, a famous Roman Dame, otherways they are both good Cavaliers. The
vote of this Cardinal will be always for Spain.

XLIII. Francesco Rapaccioli.
FRancesco Rapaccioli, a Roman, descended from a Castle, called Castle di
Scepoli, situated betwixt the City of Narni and Trani, and was the Son of a
Lilettaro, for so they call those in Rome which sell Shirts, Smocks,
Handkerchers, and other kind of linen in the City. Being a Prelate, he was
Clerk of the Chamber, and by Urban was against the will of the whole College
made Treasuror General of the holy Church; having been first honored with the
charge of Commissary General of the Papal Army in Perugia: After sometime he
was promoted to the Scarlet Gown, to make money of the Clerks place for the use
of the War, and a less while did he enjoy and exercise the Treasurorship,
being daily and continually employed in the said War. He is a rich Cardinal
according to his quality, and is most intelligent in the Civil and Cannon
Laws. He is of the Barberinies faction, and consequently French; wherefore in
the Conclave he spoke amiss of the house of Austria, for which Matthei
answered him as he deserved, and with threats told him, that he were best take
heed in what manner he spoke of the house of Austria, for else he might be
made to repent it, although he were a Cardinal. He is but little esteemed of in
the Court, and in the sacred College he is reputed as a mere Scarlet Gown, and
no otherwise. Innocent the tenth has conferred on him the Church of Terni his
Country.

XLIIII. Giovannni Giacomo Panzirolo.
GIovanni Giacomo Panzirolo, a Roman, the Son of Virgilio della valle, so
surnamed, sometime a public Tailor in Rome. Giovanni Giacomo, having profited
well in virtue, and proceeded Doctor in the Laws, applied himself to the
Court, where he was entertained by the now Pope for his Auditor, at such time
as he was a Prelate, and Nuntio at Naples; He also followed the said Pamphilio
into Spain, upon his going likewise Nuntio thither. After Pamphilio was
promoted to the Scarlet Gown, Panzirolo put himself into the Prelacie, and
having exercised many Charges and Governments, he was at last sent Nuntio into
Spain, where he carried himself very worthyly, and to the great contentment of
that Majesty; insomuch that the Pope finding him to be very intelligent, and
deserving, promoted him to the Scarlet Gown. He is a learned man, and expert in
all matters of Negotiation: He has gotten much credit with the Crown of Spain;
is greatly approved of in the Court, and is much esteemed by the sacred
College, but far more by Innocent the tenth, so that if he live, he may be
Pope. He is of a sweet coversation, excellently qualified, of a good behavior,
friendly, and thankful for all benefits received. He arrived at Rome from Spain
when as the Cardinals were in a manner all shut up in the Conclave, and brought
along with him diverse pacquets of letters written from his Catholic Majesty,
to all the sacred College, in favor of the Cardinal Pamphilio, insomuch that
it was he who gave the first start to his greatness; which benefit, together
with the goodwill Pamphilio bore him before, caused him presently upon his
assumption to place him near about him; he gave him lodgings also in the
Pontifical Palace, and made him his chief Counselor of State; so that the
whole Government of the Papacy is in a manner resting upon his shoulders. He
is not very rich, but with the Pensions and Benefices bestowed on him by the
Pope, he is thought to be exceeding well accommodatep. He leads a very retired
life, and is of a good disposition; for I remember that in the time of his
Prelacie he told me one day, how he never fell out with, nor misused any
servant of his house, to the end they should not have occasion to murmr at
him, or his birth, and lose the respect which they owed unto him; a matter
verily worthy of commendation. He is a trusty friend of the great Duke of
Toscans, but he is not confided in by the Barberini for private interests, and
because, as it is thought, he was one of them that Counseled the Pope to
prosecute them in that sort, as he did; He received the Hat from the hands of
Innocent the tenth, together with the Cardinal of Este, because they were not
present in the Court at such time as Urban was living.

XLV. Mattheo Theodoli.
MAttheo Theodoli, a Roman, descended of a Noble family in the City of Forlin
Popoli nella Romagna. He was a poor Prelate that could hardly live, but at the
instance of Antonio he was by Urban the eighth made Auditor of the Chamber, and
not having money enough to pay for it, the said Cardinal Antonio lenthim some,
out of the affection he bore to his house: He exercised the said Auditorship
but a short while, so that he could hardly recover any part of his disbursment,
because he was promoted to the Scarlet Gown out of a necessity of selling that
Office to make money of, for the supplying of the War against the Princes of
Italy; by which means he became exceeding poor, and therefore he resolved to
abandon the Spanish, and betake himself to the French party, upon promise from
that Crown of money and pensions. This Cardinal is of little esteem in the
sacred College, insomuch that when he meant to give himself to the French, he
sent a Gentleman of his to excuse him to Cardinal Montalto, saying, that his
Eminency was to pardon him for leaving the Austrian, and cleaving to the
French devotion, in regard he was reduced thereunto by mere necessity;
whereunto the said Montalto made answer, that his Catholic Majesty in losing
him lost nothing, and the King of France by geting him got little. Not long
after insued the Conclave, where, it is said, he carried himself with little
fidelity to the most Christian King; for being promised I know not what sum
of money, together with the Bishopric of Imola, he falsified the Marquess of
Sansciamont the Ambassador of France his hand to certain letters, in the behalf
of the Cardinal Pamphilio, for which he was turned out of his Majesty's favor,
and likewise deprived of all the benefits and revenues which he enjoyed in that
Kingdom; whereupon, not being able to live as a Cardinal, he, very much
dejected, absented himself from the Court and went to the Marquess santo Vito
his brother; where out of rage and discontent he became almost frantic, and
the Pope having granted him the Church of Imola, took it away again from him,
and conferred it on my Lord Cocino Romano, who was Bishop of Tursi. After he
had remained some time with his said brother, he returned to the Court, where
unknown he lived miserably: but at length having received some letters from
France, it is said that he spoke thus publicly to the Pope; Blessed Father,
the most Christian King has vouochsased to receive me a new into his pristine
favor, as much as to say, in de spite of all my il willers, and of such as
would not have it so. There can no certain judgment be made what this
Cardinals vote will be, for he turns like a leaf with every breath of wind.
Both the King of France, and the Pope make but little account of him, and yet
they seem to look upon him with a good eye.

XLVI. Fausto Poli.
FAusto Poli, born in Cassia, a place upon the confines of Abbuozzo within the
Diocese of Norcia; He was a poor man at first, and served Urban the eighth at
such time as he was Bishop of Spoletto, and had the good hap to continue in his
service until his exaltation to the Papacy; and then putting himself into the
Prelacie, he was after some time as a confident servant of his promoted by
Urban to the Scarlet Gown, together with many other servants of the Apostolical
Palace. Poli has always been much esteemed of, and loved by all the
Barberini, for his serviceableness to them in the managing of their household
affairs, for which he is only good, being otherwise altogether ignorant, and
without any known virtue in him. The Barberini would not exclude him from the
Papacy, in regard he is their creature; but he is not desired of the
Austrians, and then too there are other persons of quality, and age in the
sacred College, which far excel him in all requisites appertaining to a
Pope; and therefore he may set his heart at rest, and never think of it. This
Cardinal is so much for the Barberini, that he will always be at their
disposing, and consequently will ever side with the French. He is rich, and in
case he should be Pope, the Bishop of Amelia his Nephew will be he that shall
reign; who is not very intelligent, is of little esteem in the sacred
College, and less regarded in the Court.

XLVII. Lellio Falconieri.
LEllio Falconieri, was also an assidual servant to Urban the eighth; but
because he was too talkative, the Barberini did not regard him, neither did the
Pope in like manner much care for him He was a poor Prelate, but his father
dying, left him a great sum of money; wherefore Urban thought good to send
him abroad, that he might spend some of it, and accordingly he dispatched him
away Nuntio into Flanders, where the Cardinal Infant, being advertised that
the said Falconieri was too much a favorer of the French, and consequently a
depressor of the Spaniards, would not receive him, and so excluded him from
that employment. Afterward he was by the same Urban published for a good
Prelate, especially by causing him to execute the place of Secretary of the
Congregations of the Bishops and Regulars, and then was promoted by him to the
Scarlet Gown, with other servants of his holiness, for two reasons; the first
was, at the instance of Cardinal Sachetti, and the second, that imported most,
was, because in the War of the Barberini, the said Falconieri and his
brethren had lent round sums of money to the Apostolic See, for otherwise he
had never had the Hat. This Cardinal is no great friend to the Barberini, and
in particular to Cardinal Francesco, because when the Pope lay a dying, he
opened unto him all the misdemeanors, and tyrannical actions which the said
Francesco had perpetrated, for the which he has ever since hated him to the
death. He is well enough accommodated with the goods of fortune, but is very
much wanting in good parts, for he can hardly read and write his own name. The
present Pope, Innocent the tenth, sent him Legate to Bologna, where he has
resided a long time, and at this instant the Magistrates of that City are
suitors unto his holiness for the continuing of him in that Charge, alleging
that they are exceedingly well satisfied with his Government; and this they do
for no other reason, but because he is altogether ignorant, and that therefore
they rule all things at their pleasure, so that he is there only as it were
pro forma, the whole weight of affairs resting upon the shoulders of my Lord
Zeccadoro, who is said to be his holiness kinsman. Falconieri, in regard of
his age, is capable of the Papacy; but as for wisdom, and virtue he is most
insufficient. In discoursing his speech is rustical, and is no way splendid,
nor liberal, for it is enough to say that he is a Florentine. He is much
delighted with sports, plays, and feasts, and therefore goes continually to
the public Comedies, which are frequently acted in Bologna.

XXV. Francesco Adriano Ceva.
FRancesco Adriano Ceva, the Duke of Savoy his Subject: He was a long time an
assidual servant to Urban the eighth, and after he was a Prelate, whenever
his holiness made any promotions, he was still kept back from being promoted
by Francesco Barberino, so that if the Pope had dyed he had been excluded: for
the said Barberino, in regard there was no good correspondence between them,
labored always to put him in diffidence with Urban; that he might not give
him the Scarlet Gown, which notwithstanding at length he obtained. This
Cardinal is rich in means, but poor in virtue and knowledge. He has many
Nephews, but the most beloved is Signior Carlo Francesco Bayla, the Son of
my Lord Bayla, the Consistorial Advocate, who lives with this his Uncle, which
allows him scarce a penny in his purse, such is his avarice: nevertheless, in
case he should attain to the Papacy, this would be the reigning Nephew. Ceva
is not much affected by the Princes of Savoy his Lords, because when there is
any benefice, or Abbacie void in his Country, or other places of their States,
he never cares to have it demanded for any of those Princes deserving servants,
but always seeks to apply it to his own, and his kinsmens benefit; neither is
he greatly regarded by the Crown of France, although he was Nuntio with that
Majesty, by reason he is always inclined to the Austrian devotion, and
therefore I cannot see how he should ever get to Peter's Chair, because in every
event of the Conclave, they would exclude him for the causes aforesaid: The
Austrians too confide little in him, believing, that even as the Dukes of Savoy
his Lords use to do, who play the turne-coates upon every motive according to
their interest, so Ceva their subject would do the like.

XLIX. Angelo Giorio.
ANgelo Giorio, a Native of the City of Camerino, of a vile progeny, and a
poor Priest in Rome; where having for some time kept a school, he left that,
and put himself to serve the Cardinal Maffeo Barberino for a tutor to his
Nephews, Francesco, Antonio, and Thadeo, leading them daily to the Roman
College; and withal employing himself very diligently in diverse other affairs
of the house, he won his Masters goodwill and love. Afterward, Maffeo being
elected Pope, Ciorio entered into the Prelacie, and in a short time thrived so
well, that he got together a good estate; whereupon having a long while
continued, performing many good services to Urban, it seemed convenient to his
holiness to do him right, and so together with other servants of his he
promoted him to the Scarlet Gown. He has brothers, and Nephews, which in
regard of their rustical conditions will not let themselves be seen, nor known
in the Court. He delights greatly in hunting, and for that he was much made of
by the whole house of the Barberini, and particularly by the Pope. This
Cardinal, because he was exalted from nothing, will always be at the disposing
and command of the Barberini, and consequently will of force be for the French
against the Austrians. He is a man of a lusty age, not very old, is little
respected in the sacred College, and at Court is esteemed as a raking,
covetous Cardinal, that for money would sell himself to do any vile thing. He
has no other good in him, but that he is not so ignorant, as the rest of
Urbans servants are, because he has been continually exercised in pedantism.

L. Vicenzo Costaguti.
VIcenzo Costaguti, a Nobleman of Genoua He was Clerk of the Chamber, and did
not hope to come so soon to the Scarlet Gown, because he was too young, and
also for that the Court abounded with many other aged and deserving persons;
but welfare the War of the Barberini, which made many rise, that otherwise
peradventure had never been promoted. For Urban, being loath to meddle with any
of the accumulated treasure, which he had buried under ground for the benefit
of his Nephews, and wanting money to maintain the War, exalted many Officers
of the Chamber, and then sold their places to other Prelates; in which manner
Costaguti was promoted. This Cardinal, before he received the Scarlet Gown,
together with his father lent a great sum of money to the Chamber, and had for
security thereof the five millions which were laid up in the Castle Saint
Angelo by Sixtus quintus. He is a splendid, amiable, sociable, gentle, affable
and courteous Lord; he is much esteemed of by Innocent the tenth, is
charitable, well qualified, and of a goodly presence: He is of no faction, but
keeps himself neutral, is learned, and intelligent; and may truly be called the
Cardinal of Gold, in regard he paid treble for the Hat. He is held to be very
grateful; and therefore he is loved and reverenced of all, as he in like manner
honors all.

LI. Paolo Emilio Rondanino.
PAolo Emilio Rondanino, a Roman Gentleman, and Nephew to the late Cardinal
Zachia, that sought to advance his pretensions by the help of the Spanish
Cardinals, who being distasted with Urban the eighth, for that he showed
himself, as in effect he was, too much French, oftentimes met together, and
made diverse Congregations to depose the said Urban, after he had held the
Papacy thirteen years: And whilst his holiness by reason of his sickness was
gone to the Castle of Gandolfo for change of air, the said Spanish Cardinals
secretly assembled in a Congregation, to make Cardinal Zachia Pope instead of
the said Urban, and depose him under the pretext of disabilitie: But it did not
succeed, for all was made known to his holiness, who returning privily to
Rome, called a consistory, where all the Cardinals being present, Urban with an
high voice, said alowd, Where is the new Pope whom you mean to adore? which the
Spanish faction hearing, and perceiving they were discovered, remained as it
were all dead and confounded. Hereupon it was, that Urban made the Bull, which
enjoined every Cardinal, Archbishop, Bishop, and others whatsoever, that had
cure of Souls, to go and reside at their Churches, upon pain of
excommunication, and deprivation of their Dignities and Benefices; so that the
poor Cardinal Lodovisio, who lay grievously sick of the Gout, was forced to get
him away to his Church of Bologna, where not long after he dyed with excessive
pain; and all those besides which had a hand in that conspiracy dyed
discontented, and contemned; particularly Cardinal Zachia. Rondanino was Clerk
of the Chamber, and was promoted together with the other Officers of the
Chamber, as the said Costaguti was; but especially for that he had at his own
charge in the time of the War raised a company of Cuirasiers, besides diverse
other services. This Cardinal is but of a mean understanding, and proud in the
highest degree, insomuch as he deignes not to render a salute unto any person
that is not his equal; a discurtesie verily worthy of blame. He is wealthy,
loves his pleasure, and is taken with every Roman delight.

LII. Giovanni Steffano Donghi.
GIovanni Steffano Donghi, a Gentleman of Genoua. He was Clerk of the Chamber,
and was sent by Urban the eighth, after the unhappy success of Cardinal Spada's
Negoti ation, Nuntio Apostolical, with the Title of Plenipotentiarie, into
Lombardy, for the concluding of a peace with the Princes of Italy, where he
caused him to spend the second Clerkship of the Chamber, without any profit at
all redounding to himself thereby. He was promoted to the Scarlet Gown for the
same end, as his other fellow Clerks were. This Cardinal is a man learned, and
curious; he is well respected of the Pope, who made him Legate of Ferrara, in
which Charge he demeaned himself with great commendation. He has many good
parts, is affable, courteous, and also charitable. He is very rich, and spends
enough, but to purpose, and not idly. He is much devoted to the Catholic
King, and makes open profession thereof, having his arms set up over the Gate
of his Palace. In the past Conclave he abandoned the Barberini, and followed
the faction of Spain, which holds him in some esteem, all his whole house
living under the protection thereof.

LIII. Carlo Roscetti.
CArlo Roscetti, a Nobleman of Ferrara. He came a young man to Rome, where,
putting himself into the Prelacie, and being employed by Francesco Barberino in
many businesses, he effected them so well to his satisfaction, that he took a
great liking to him, in such sort as by his mediation he was sent Nuntio into
Cermany, and returning from that Charge, he was after some years dispatched
also as Nuntio into Ireland, to supply the Irish Catholics with money, and
animate them to fight for their Religion against the Parliament of England.
Upon his coming back from thence, he was promoted to the Scarlet Gown, at the
instance of the said Francesco, to the end he might thereby oblige him to be
still of his faction in all Conclaves, and other occurrences, as accordingly he
has showed himself. He was made Bishop of Faenza in Romagna, where he was
highly esteemed, and commended for a worthy man, and of a Noble disposition. He
is a poor Cardinal, and yet for all that he is not slack in giving of alms. He
is not much devoted to the house of Austria, is but young, and of a mean
understanding. The present Pope regards him well, albeit he declared himself
but little affected to him in his election. He has brothers, and many kinsmen,
which are Counts, and Marquesses in Lombardy.

LIVE. Giovanni De Lugo.
GIovanni De Lugo, a Spanish Gentleman. He was a Jesuit, and a great Divine, of
whom Urban the eighth made use in diverse occurrences to his no little
satisfaction; wherefore he promoted him to the Scarlet Gown. This Cardinal was
ever an honest man, and of an exemplary life; but his being a Jesuit, is that
which I cannot abide, for he was Master of the Schools of the College, and
hoc sufficiat. Some say that he was assisted and supplied by his Company;
others say no, because he has showed himself as it were an enemy to the
Jesuits; but that he was assisted by his kindred, and had also got together some
store of money to such a use, as the manner of the Jesuits is to do, cum
cantionibus, and aliis adminiculis. His descent was not ignoble, and he has
had many men renowned for learning in his house. This Lugo, by reason of the
obligation wherein he stood far engaged to the Barberini, made show in the
Conclave of following their faction; but afterward with a stratagem he gave
his vote to the Spaniards, and when as the Pope was elected, publicly
declared himself of the Austrian party: so that in him is verified the saying;
As ungrateful as a Jesuit.

The promotions which were made by Paul the fifth, and Gregory the fifteenth.
LV. Alfonso della Queva.
ALfonso della Queva, Marquess of Medmar, a Spaniard; He was sent by the
Catholic King, Ledger Ambassador to the Republique of Venice; in the time of
whose residence there, the Duke of Ossona, Viceroy of Naples, sent a very
mighty Fleet to take that City by surprise; for holding intelligence with some
traitors in it. He had made an agreement with them, that they should set the
famous Arsenal thereof on fire, to the end that whilst every one was running
thither for to help to quench it, the Fleet might enter at their pleasure, and
seize on the most important places of the City; but the plot being discovered
before it came to execution, and the Nobility believing that the Marquess of
Queva was privy and consenting to that treason; went to the Palace where he
dwelt, to cut him and all his Family in pieces; but being forewarned thereof,
he fled with all speed in a Gondola toward Rome, where a few months after he
was by Gregory the fifteenth with the assent of the Catholic King promoted to
the Scarlet Gown; and after some years he was by his Majesty made Governor of
Flanders and the Low Countries, where he carried himself with the little
satisfaction of those people, by seeking the ruin of that Country for the
enriching of himself; but the Catholic King being advertised of his ill
Government, deprived him of that Charge, and disgraced him in such manner, as
he was also bereft of all the revenues and profits which he enjoyed in the
Kingdoms of Spain; by reason whereof he was so exhausted, that he ran mightily
in debt. After the assumption of Innocent the tenth, followed the death of
Cardinal Crescentio, whereby the Bishopric of Palestina became void, which by
way of senioritie appertained unto the said Cardinal della Queva, who therefore
was desired by Cardianl Carlo de Medici to resign it unto him, to the end that
remaining in that City, which bore the Title of Don Tadeos Principality, he
might cross and vex the Barberini; and this he promised Don Carlo to do, but
never performed it; for the Barberini prevented this disorder by giving Queva I
know not how many thousands of crowns not to resign the Bishopric, so that
he was not so good as his word to the said Prince Cardinal, for which he was
very much blamed of every one. He is a very learned man, and a great wit. He is
somewhat esteemed in the College, but little respected in the Court, having no
other train but his own Caroches, as one that is not capable of the Papacy,
because he is a Spaniard: and the very Spaniards themselves too make no great
reckoning of him, holding him as inconfident, although he strives with all
ardor to show himself more affectionate and diligent in the Kings service and
affairs, then any other person whatsoever. He is of a good and exemplary life,
and for his knowledge and doctrine is beloved of his holiness.

LVI. Marcello Lanti.
MArcello Lanti, a Roman Nobleman, Deane of the sacred College, and Nephew to
Paul the fifth, being the Son of a Sister of his. He was promoted to the
Scarlet Gown by the said Paul, is a very old man, of an holy conversation, of a
most innocent life, and mavelous charitable. He is of kin to the greatest
part of the Roman Nobility, and also to the Great Duke of Toscan. He has
enjoyed the Scarlet Gown forty years, and yet is for all that ignorant, testy,
and obstinate. He was not nominated in the last Conclave, for that the
Barberini durst not conside in him, by reason of his affinity with the
Borghesi, and Great Duke, as aforesaid. he is head of the Congregation of the
Bishops, and Regulars, and if he live to a vacant Sea, he may chance get into
Peter's Chair. He makes open profession of his devotion to the house of Austria,
although the Marquess his brother, lately dead, was always French. This
Cardinal would not be amiss for the good, and Government of the Church, for he
is a peaceable man, is excedingly well esteemed of by the Sacred College, and
Roman Court, is also greatly respected by the Princes, and has not any
Cardinal his Enemy; wherefore he may very well attain to the Papacy, as is
much desired of all he should; but whilst the Barberini live, he will hardly
come to be Pope, for they have been sufficiently punished by the election of
Innocent the tenth Pamphilio.

LVII. Carlo de Medeci.
CArlo de Medeci, a Florentine, Uncle to the Great Duke of Toscan, and brother
to the late Queen Mother of France. He was promoted to the Scarlet Gown as a
great Prince, and therefore he is in high esteem, and Authority with the
sacred College, and all the Court. He was the principal Author of the election
of Innocent the tenth, who out of his Obligation and Gratitude bears a great
affection to this Prince. He was, and is an Enemy to all the house of the
Barberini for diverse occasions, but the chiefest was their War with the Great
Duke. He is a Lord of a clear understanding, beloved of every one, courteous,
splendid, and delighting in pleasures, and recreations. He is mightily affected
to the Family of Austria, so that he could be contented, as one may say, to
have even his skin plucked over his ears for the King of Spain. He is of a
great age, but appears not to be so, by reason of the corpulencie of his body.
No more is, or ought to be said of this Cardinal, being a great Prince, and as
such a one, I leave him.

LVIII. Baldassare di Sandoval.
BAldassare di Sandoval, a Spaniard, and Bishop of Sivil. He was promoted to
the Scarlet Gown at the instance of the Catholic King, by whom he was
afterward sent Ambassador to Rome, in which Charge he carried him self with
the satisfaction and commendation of both the parties. Upon the end of that
employment he returned into Spain, where being kept from receiving audience of
the King by the Count-Duke, he one day bastinadoed him with the same battoon,
wherewith he sustained himself being lame of the gout; in revenge whereof the
Count-Duke, caused the horses of his Caroach to be cudgeld whilst he was in it.
Sandoval was he, that in his first Audience discovered the misdemeanors of the
said Count-Duke, and also the loss of the Kingdom of Portugal, of Catalogna,
and other States; whereof the King perceiving the truth, turned him out of his
favor, and reduced him to those terms, that he was fain to live exiled from
the Court in a Country house of his. This Cardinal is very highly esteemed, and
exceedingly beloved of the King, is very old, of a good conversation,
bountiful, of great authority, and well liked of every one. He is a great
friend of Innocent the tenths, having held a strickt correspondence with him at
such time as he was Nuntioia Naples, and in Spain, which he continued with him
whilst he was at Rome. He was not present in the last Conclave, by reason of
the lenggth of the voyage, and his great age, which is such, as he can stand no
man in any stead hereafter, because he will never be able to come into the
Conclave again.

LIX. Agostino Spinola.
AGostino Spinola, a Genouese of the old Nobility, and brother to the late
Marquess Spinola, that most famous Captain. He was promoted to the Scarlet
Gown by Paul the fifth, at the instance of the Catholic King. He was
Archbishop of Compostella, from which he is removed, and has the
Archbishopric of Toledo in lieu thereof conferred on him, with a pension of
ten thousand Crowns a year. He is exceedingly beloved of his Catholic
Majesty, for his brothers merits; is of kin to the greatest part of the
Genouese Nobility, is very rich, and so old, that in regard of the length of
the way he could not come to the last Conclave, nor can he be at the next,
unless he sets forth two months before the death of the Pope. He is a Lord of
a good disposition, splendid, and charitable. His vote, according to his
obligation to the Catholic King, will always be for the Spanish faction.
When he was young, he delighted in taking all the pleasure that possibly he
could, never standing upon money.

LX. Giulio Cardinal Roma.
GIulio Cardinal Roma, of a Noble Family in the state of Milan, who having put
himself into the Prelacie, was promoted to the Scarlet Gown by Paul the fifth,
because he knew him to be both learned, and deserving. The City of Rome in
regard of his excellent qualities expects great things from him; for being a
good and conscientious man, it is believed that he will be Pope if he live; but
should that come to pass, I doubt he would be too rigorous, especially when
Ecclesiastical matters are concerned: for he could be contented to put not
only his house, but his own life in jeopardie, for the Maintenance of the
Churches decorum; being naturally stiff and obstinate in favor of the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Francesco Barberino would willingly have stickled
in the last Conclave for his advancement to the Papacy, but that he could not
trust him, because he was a Milanese; fearing, least as one of that Country, he
should deal with him, and all the house of the Barberini, as Pius quartus, who
was likewise a Milanese, did with the Caraffeschi; and bring him to make
restitution of the money taken out of Castle Angelo; as also render a strict
account of his administration. This Cardinal is head of the Congregations,
which are held in his own house. He is a very knowing Lord, of a good
disposition, and of an exemplary life. In negotiating he shows himself very
affectionate, is much respected of the sacred College, and is greatly esteemed
in the Court. He is beloved of the Catholic King, and is exceedingly desired
by the Great Duke, and the Republique of Venice, but little enough by the Crown
of France.

A Table of the Cardinals.
1. GIovanni Carlo de Medici. page 1 2. Domenico Cecchini. page 2 3. Nicolo
Albergati. page 4 4. Horatio Giustiniano. page 7 5. Alderano Cibo. page 9 6.
Pier Luigi Caraffa. page 11 7. Federico Sforza. page 15 8. Tiberio Cenci. page
17 9. Benedetto Odescalcho, page 21 10. Fabritio Savelli. page 23 11. Francesco
Cherubino. page 27 12. Christofforo Vidman. page 28 13. Lorenzo Roggi. page 30
14. Francesco Maidalchini. page 36 15. Francesco Barberino. page 41 16. Ernesto
Adalberto d'Arach. page 50 17. Giulio Sachetti. page 51 18. Bernardino Spada.
page 55 19. Fe derico Cornaro. page 63 20. Martio Ginetti. page 65 21. Antonio
Barberino. page 86 22. Girolamo Colonna. page 72 23. Cirriaco Rocci. page 76
24. Giovanni Battista Palotta. page 78 25. Theodoro Trivultio. page 83 26.
Steffano Durazzo. page 89 27. Marc' Antonio Franciotti. page 87 28. Federico
Carpegna. page 90 29. Francesco Maria Brancaccio. page 91 30. Rinaldo d'Este.
page 95 31. Francesco Peretti, alias Cardinal Montalto, page 99 32. Giulio
Mazzarini. page 102 33. Marc' Antonio Bragadini. page 106 34. Pietro Donato
Cesis. page 108 35. Francesco Maria Machiavelli. page 110 36. Verginio Orsini.
page 112 37. Giulio Gabrielli. page 115 38. Ascanio Filomarini, page 117 39.
Gieronimo Verospi, page 124 40. Gaspare Matthei. page 126 41, Girolamo
Grimaldi. page 127 42. Cesare Fachinetti. page 131 43. Francesco Rapaccioli,
page 132 44. Giovanni Giacomo Panzirolo. page 134 45. Mattheo Theodoli. page
136 46. Fausto Poli. page 139 47. Lellio Falconieri. page 141 48 Francesco
Adriano Ceva. page 143 49. Angelo Giorio. page 146 50 Vicenzo Costaguti. page
146 51. Paolo Emilio Rondanino, page 148 52. Giovanni Steffano Donghi. page 150
53. Carlo Roscetti. page 151 54. Giovanni de lugo. page 152 55. Alfonso della
Queva. page 154 56. Marcello Lanti. page 157 57. Carlo de Medici. page 158 58.
Baldassare di Sandova. page 160 59. Agostino Spinola. page 162 60. Giulio
Cardinal Roma. page 163
FINIS.

