THE NEW Model of a part of the MILITIA OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND, Consisting
of five Thousand Foot, and five Hundred Horse; with the Instructions to the
Commissioners of the Militia.
FOrasmuch, as the Kings Majesty, taking to Consideration, that by Act of
Parliament in the Year 1663. the Estates of Parliament did then heartily offer
unto His Majesty, the Number of twenty Thousand Footmen, and two Thousand
Horsemen, sufficiently Armed and furnished, with forty days provision to be
raised in the several Shires of the Kingdom, according to the proportions
mentioned in that Act. And seeing by Act of Parliament in the Year 1669. the
Country is to pay the Horsemen at eighteen shilling, and the Footmen at six
shilling (...) per diem, for every day that they appear at any Randezvouz or
Muster; Yearly to the effect the Soldiers may be Exercised and may thereby
understand the Discipline of War: And that if His Majesty shall call them
together for His Service, the Country is obliged to furnish them with forty
days Provision or Pay. In prosecution whereof, The Lords of Privy Council for
the time, to whom the Parliament by their Act did remit the particular ordering
and setlement of this matter, did by their several Acts, put in Execution the
said Act of Parliament, by reducing these Forces of Horse and Foot, to formed
Troops and Regiments; and by His Majesty's special warrant, did prescribe the
way for naming and placing all the inferior Officers of Horse and Foot, the
chief Officers being Commissionate by His Majesty, as their Acts made
thereanent, and the instructions given to them for that purpose more fully
bear. And whereas His Majesty by a Letter under His Royal Hand directed to His
Council, of the date the 26. of October 1678. Thought fit for this Service, and
the present Exigent of Affairs, to appoint five Thousand Foot, and five Hundred
Horse, of the number of the twenty Thousand Foot, and two Thousand Horse
abovementioned, to be drawn out of the several Shires and Burghs of this
Kingdom, being a fourth part of the whole, not including the Militia Regiment
of the good Town of Edinburgh as any part of this Number. And did appoint these
Foot to be divided into five Regiments, and the Horse into five Troops, and
each Regiment consisting of ten Companies to be commanded by a Major, and each
Company to have a Leiutenant, Ensign, and two Serjants: Each Troop of Horse to
have a Leiutenant, and four Corporals; and to whom, for their encouragement,
His Majesty has appointed competent Yearly Sallaries. And to the end, this His
Majesty's Royal resolution might not be mistaken, Thought fit to declare, that
thereby he did not intend to put the Country to any greater charge then what
they stand already obliged by Acts of Parliament Yearly. And by this His
intention does not resolve to lay aside the yearly Randezvouz of the rest of
the Militia of this Kingdom, Horse and Foot, as formerly. In Obedience, and
conform to which Letter, and His Majesty's other Letters direct to His Privy
Council since the said Letter relative thereto. The Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council Have ordained, and ordaines five Thousand Foot, and five Hundred
Horse, of the number of these twenty Thousand Foot, and two Thousand Horse of
the Militia, established by Act of Parliament to be drawn out of the several
Shires and Burghs of this Kingdom, being a fourth part of the whole, not
including the Militia of the Town of Edinburgh, according to the rule of
Proportion, and has made a particular division thereof, and given Instructions
to the Commissioners of the Militia in manner aftermentioned, all which is
Ratified and approven by His Majesty,

Follows, the division of the five Thousand Foot in the several Shires of this
Kingdom, according to the proportion of the Militia appointed by the twenty
fifth Act of the third Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, in anno 1663.

Follows the division of the five Thousand Foot in the several Shires of this
Kingdom according to the proportion of the Militia appointed by the 25. Act of
the 3. Session of His Majesty's 1. Parl, Anno 1663.
REGIMENT 1.
The Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk. Three Companies, consisting of one
hundredth and eleven men each: which makes up in all -- 0333 The Shire of
Berwick. Two Companies, consisting of one hundredth each: which makes -- 0200
The Shire of Peebles. One Company consisting of sixty six men which makes --
0066 The Shire of Dumfreis. Two Companies, consisting of one hundredth each:
which makes -- 0200 The Shire of Wigton, and Stewartry of Kirkendburgh. Two
Companies, consisting of one hundredth each: which makes -- 0200 All these makes
up one Regiment consisting of nine hundredth ninty and nine men. -- 0999

REG. 2.
The Shire of Edinburgh. Two Companies, consisting of one hundredth men each:
which makes -- 0200 The Shire of Haddingtown. Two Companies, consisting of one
hundredth each, which makes -- 0200 The Shire of Linlithgow One Company,
consisting of eighty three men, inde -- 0083 The Shires of Stirling and
Clackmannan Two Companies, consisting of eighty three men each: which makes --
0166 The Shire of Lanerk Two Companies, consisting of one hundredth and twenty
five men each: which makes -- 0250 Of the Locality from the Shire of Air and
Renfrew One Company, consisting of one hundredth and ten: makes -- 0110 All
these make up one Regiment, consisting of one thousand and nine men. -- 1009

REG. 3.
The Shire of Fife and Kinrosse Four Companies, consisting of one hundredth
each: which makes -- 0400 The Shire of Perth Four Companies, consisting of one
hundredth each: which makes -- 0400 The Locality of Air and Renfrew. Two
Companies, consisting of one hundredth and eleven each: makes -- 0222 All these
make up one Regiment, consisting of one thousand twenty and two men. -- 1022

REG. 4.
The Shire of Forfar. Three Companies, consisting of eighty three men each:
which makes -- 0249 The Shire of Kincardin and Marischals division of Aberdeen
Two Companies, consisting of one hundredth men: which makes -- 0200 The remnant
part of Aberdeen and Bamff Three Companies, consisting of eighty eight men
each: which makes -- 0264 The Locality of Argyle, Dumbarton, and Bute Two
Companies, consisting of one hundredth men each: which makes -- 0200 All these
make up one Regiment, consisting of nine hundredth and thirteen men. -- 0913

REG. 5
The Shire of Elgin and Nairn. Three Companies, consisting of eighty three men
each: This comprehends the Earl of Murray's division of Innernes to Nes, with
Badzenoch, Inde -- 0249 The Earl of Seaforth and Lord Lovats division of
Innnerness. Two Companies, consisting of eighty three men each, inde -- 0166
The rest of Ross. One Company, consisting of one hundredth, Inde -- 0100 The
Shires of Sutherland and Caithness Two Companies, consisting of one hundredth
each: which makes -- 0200 Orkney and Zetland. Two Companies, consisting of
eighty three men each: which makes -- 0166 All these make up one Regiment,
consisting of eight hundredth and eighty one men, Inde -- 0881

The whole five Regiments of Foot amount to four thousand eight hundredth twenty
and four men. -- 4824

A Division of five hundredth Horse, on the several Shires of this Kingdom,
according to the proportion of the Militia appointed by the 25. Act of the 3.
Sess. of His Majesty's 1. Parliament, anno 1663.
TROOP 1.
The Shires of Roxburgh and Selkirk One Squad or Corporalship, consisting of
thirty seven Horsemen, Inde -- 0037 The Shires of Berwick and Peebles One Squad
or Corporalship, consisting of twenty five men, whereof Berwick eighteen, and
Peebles seven: in both -- 0025 The Shire of Dumfreis. One Squad or
Corporalship, consisting of twenty two Horsemen, Inde -- 0022 The Shire of
Wigton and Stewartry of Kirkcudburgh One Squad or Corporalship, consisting of
twenty two Horsemen, Inde -- 0022 All these make up one Troop, consisting of
one hundredth and six Horsemen. -- 0106

TROOP 2.
The Shires of Edinburgh, Haddingtown, and Linlithgow Two Squads, or
Corporalships, each consisting of twenty three Horsemen, whereof the Shire of
Edinburgh eighteen, Haddingtown eighteen, and Linlithgow ten, inde, in all. --
0046 The Shires of Stirling and Clackmannan One Squad or Corporalship,
consisting of twenty two Horsemen -- 0022 The Shire of Lanerk One Squad or
Corporalship, consisting of thirty seven Horsemen -- 0037 All these make up one
Troop, consisting of one hundredth and five Horsemen. -- 0105

TROOP 3.
The Shires of Fife and Kinross. Two Squads or Corporalships consisting of
twenty two Horsemen each inde -- 0044 The Shire of Perth Two Squads or
Corporalships, consisting of twenty two Horsemen each: Inde -- 0044 All these
make up one Troop, consisting of eighty eight Horsemen. -- 0088

TROOP 4.
The Shire of Forfar One Squad or Corporalship, consisting of twenty five
Horsemen, Inde -- 0025 The Shire of Kincardin, and the Earl Marischals division
of Aberdeen Shire. One Squad or Corporalship, consisting of eighteen, Inde --
0018 The rest of Aberdeen Shire and Bamff Shire. Two Squads or Corporalships,
consisting of twenty two Horsemen each -- 0044 All these make up one Troop,
consisting of eighty seven Horsemen. -- 0087

TROOP 5.
The Shires of Elgin, Nairn, Innerness, Ross, Sutherland, and Caithnes. Two
Squads or Corporalships, consisting of sixty six Horsemen, being thirty three
in each Squade, whereof Elgin and Nairn, to the Water of Ness, twenty two, the
Earl of Seafort and Lord Lovat's divivision of Innerness, twenty two, the rest
of Rosse, the Shires of Sutherland and Caithness; making up in all sixty six
Horsemen, Elgin, Nairn, the Earl of Murray and Lovat's division of Innernesse
to make one Squad or Corporalship: And the Earl of Seaforts division; the rest
of Rosse, Sutherland, and Caithness to make up another Squad of twenty two,
Inde -- 0066 The Shires of Air and Renfrew Two Squades or Corporalships,
consisting of twenty two Horsemen each -- 0044 All these make up one Troop,
consisting of one hundredth and ten Horsemen. -- 0110

The whole five Troops amount to four hundredth and nintie six Horsemen. -- 0496

Follows the Instructions given by His Majesty's Privy Council, to the
Commissioners of the Militia, in the several Shires of the Kingdom.
I. YOu are ordered to Stent the number of Horsemen and Footmen upon the
Paroches, Heretors, and Liferenters in your Shire, in the usual manner, having
always a care to pitch upon such as may constantly attend upon the Service. II.
You are to cause List the Names of the Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, and set
down the names of their Parents, Designations, and Dwelling-places, and to Rank
them in their respective Companies, and to deliver these Lists to the
respective Leiutenants. III. You are to change no Soldier, Horse or Foot, for
another, without express coment of the Leiutenant, who is to be answerable to
his Major for what he does thereanent; and both the Major and Leiutenant are to
obey the Leiutenant-General, or Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Forces, as
they will be answerable. IV. You are to order, that no Horse once received and
listed, be changed, without consent of the Leiutenant, and the allowance of his
superior Officer. V. You are to choice and list new Soldiers, in place of
these who shall be removed by Death, or Infirmity, or shall remove off the
Ground, and send their Names to their Leiutenants; and that these new listed
Soldiers be sufficient Men for the Service, conform to the first Act of the
second Session Parliament 2. Charles 2. VI. You are to appoint all these listed
within your Shire, to Rendezvous once in two Months, and to keep together eight
days, at such Times and Places within the Shire, as the Major of Foot or
Leiutenant of Horse shall appoint; and if the Rendezvous be without the Shire
at such Times and Places as the Leiutenant-General, or Commander in Chief shall
appoint; and the keeping of the Rendezvous once in two Months eight days
together shall continue, until the Commander in Chief shall order it otherwise.
VII. You are to order the Heretors to give allowance to the Horsemen and Foot
Soldiers, for keeping the said days of Rendezvous of eight days, once every
two Months, and that for ten Months (His Majesty being to pay them for the last
two Months) at the rate of six shillings Scots a day for ilk Footman, and
eighteen shilling Scots for each Horsman, conform to the Act of Parliament: And
ready obedience is expected hereto, seeing they are at no more expense by paying
forty days to this number, then they were at formerly, by paying ten days to
the whole, which they either did, or should have done. VIII. You are to take
care that both Horsemen and Footmen be sufficiently clothed, fitted with all
kind of Furniture necessar for the Service; and that the Arms for the Foot, be
two parts Muskets, and one part Pikes; and the Horsemen to be armed with a
sufficient Sword and Hulster-Pistols. IX. Each Leader of Horse is to furnish
and uphold a sufficient Horse with his Furniture, for the space of seven Years
from their first Muster; and at the expiring of the seven Years, He, and these
of the Fraction with him are to contribute for another Horse, not under the
value of ten pounds Sterling, and fifty eight Inches high, and that a Horse be
provided accordingly, and so forth at the expiring of each seven Years
successive. X. You are to be careful that the Persons to be listed for the
Militia, Horse or Foot, shall be able bodies of Men, fit for the Service, and
that they be such as the Muster-master shall approve of, and who shall take the
Military Oaths appointed by Act of Council, each Rendezvous day, and such Oaths
as are contained in the Articles of War. XI. The Heretors of your Shire are to
pay their proportion of forty eight pound Scots to the Trumpeter, with the
other Shires who are joined with them in constituting the Troop: As also, Your
Shire is to pay twelve pound Scots to every Drummer who serves in the Companies
within your Shire, conform to the Act of Parliament. XII. And since His Majesty
has under His Royal Hand, given Commissions to Majors, Leiutenants, and Ensigns
of Foot, and to the Leiutenants of Horse; and has declared it His Pleasure,
that the Leiutenants of Horse and Foot shall choose their own Corporals and
Sergeants: Therefore you are to give your concurrence to them in their
respective stations. XIII. You are to appoint two of your number per vices, to
attend the first day of each Rendezvous within your Shire, and one of your
number to attend the general Rendezvous of your Regiment or Troop when they
come together, it being necessar, that there be one Commissioner present for
every Shire out of which the Regiment or Troop is taken, to the effect they may
give order for fining and punishing the Absents, and for proceeding against all
Deficients, and for performance of every thing else incumbent to them, conform
to the Acts of Parliament and Council made thereanent, as well in every Company
of Foot and Squad of Horse, as when the whole Regiment and Troop are together.
XIV. These two Commissioners, with the concurrence of the Commanding-officer
present for the time of the Foot-Company, or Squadron of Horse, or
Corporalship, and of the Major of Foot and Leiutenant of Horse, or other
Commanding-officer present, when the Regiment of Foot, or Troop of Horse is
together; are carefully to ca^^e poy^d every Deficient and other
Transgressors, conform to the Acts of Parliament and Council anent the
Militia: Hereby requiring the said Commissioners to do exact diligence herein,
as they will be answerable at their outmost peril. And certifying, these
Commissioners who shall be absent, or being present, shall neglect their duty,
hereby, and by Act of Parliament entrusted to them, shall be proceeded against
as Contemners of His Majesty's Authority and Service, and neglecters of the
public Peace of the Kingdom. XV. The Commissioners of the Militia on the south
side of the North Water of Esk, in the several Shires of the Kingdom, are
appointed to have their first meeting at the head Burgh of the Shire, upon the
fifteen day of July next, and the Militia thereof, to have their first
Rendezvous upon the thirteenth of August thereafter. And the Commissioners
benorth the said Water, are to have their first meeting upon the tenth of
August, and the Militia thereof to have their first Randezvouz upon the 24. of
Aug. And the Commissioners on the south side of the said Water, are to give an
account what they do at their first Meeting to the Council, upon the first
Council day of August, and to give the second account of the condition of their
first Rendezvous, against the first Council day in September. And these benorth
the said Water, are to give an account what they do at their first Meeting, the
first Council day in September; and the second account of the condition of the
first Rendezvous, the first Council day in October next. XVI. The Commissioners
of the Militia of the several Shires at their first Meeting, are to appoint the
Place of the first Rendezvous in every Shire, and to acquaint the Person of
Quality afternamed, who is appointed to be present thereat. XVII. The Persons
of Quality afternamed, are appointed to conveen the Commissioners of the
Militia to their first Meeting, and to be present thereat, and to go to the
several Shires, and see the first Rendezvous kept, and give an account
thereof to the Council. For the Shire of Roxburgh, the Earl of Roxburgh For the
Shire of Selkirk, the Lord of Hayning For the Shire of Berwick, the Earl of
Home For the Shire of Peebles, the Lord Livingston For the Shire of Dumfreis,
the Earl of Queensberry For the Shire of Wigton, the Lord of Burghton For the
Stewartry of Kircudbright, the Earl of Nithisdale For the Shire of Edinburgh,
Lord Hatton Theasaurer Depute For the Shire of Haddington, the Earl of Winton
For the Shire of Linlithgow, the Earl of Linlithgow For the Shire of Stirling,
the Lord Elphingston For the Shire of Clackmannan, the Earl of Mar For the
Shire of Lanerk, the Marquess of Douglas, and the Lord Ross For the Shires of
Fife and Kinross, the Lord Chancellor, or whom he shall appoint For the Shire
of Perth, the Marquess of Athol For the Shire of Air, the Earl of Glencairn,
For the Shire of Renfrew, the Lord Ross For the Shire of Forfar, the Earl of
Southesk For Kincardin and Marischals part of Aberdeen, the Earl Marischal For
Bamff and rest of Aberdeen, the Lord of Auchmedden younger For Argile, the
Earl of Argile For Bute, the Lord of Kelburn For Dumbarton, the Lord Lorn For
Elgin, the Lord Duffus For Nairn, and Earl of Murrays division of Innerness,
and Badzenoch, the Earl of Murray, and in his absence the Lord of Caddel For
the Earl of Seaforth, and Lord Lovats division of Innerness, the Earl of
Seaforth The rest of Ross, Sir George Mackenzie of Tarbet, or Sir George Munro
For the Shire of Caithness, the Earl of Caithness For the Shire of Sutherland,
the Earl of Sutherland, or Sir Robert Gordon of Embo For Orkney and Zetland,
the Stewart or his Depute.
XVIII. His Majesty's Privy Council have appointed, and appoints, that in the
Shires of Ross, Sutherland, Caithness, and Orkney, which had not formerly a
Militia settled therein, the Justices of Peace, and Commissioners of Excise, be
Commissioners of the Militia. Extracted by me
WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.

FINIS.
Additional Instructions for the Militia: Edinburgh, the eight day of July,
1680.
I. THE Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council considering, that by the first
Article of the late Instructions; the Heretors and Liferenters are ordered to
Stent the number of Horse and Foot in the usual way: Do declare, that albeit
according to the Act of Parliament, the Heretors and Liferenters be liable
thereto, yet they are to have their relief from the Tenants, whose proper
Burden it is to furnish the Bodies of the Footmen and their Arms, and Pay,
during the days of the Rendezvous; and the Heretors may accordingly force any
of their Tenants or Servants who are fittest: the rest of the Tenants
contributing for their several Proportions, in the way formerly accustomed,
either by Paroches, or otherwise, according as has been used in the respective
Shires. II. As to the third and fourth Articles of the said Instructions,
whereby it is appointed, that no Soldier, Horse or Foot, be changed for
another, and that no Horse once received and listed, be changed without consent
of the Leiutenant; It is ordered that no such change be made without express
consent of the Leiutenant, and two Commissioners of the Militia. III. As to the
sixth Article of the Instructions, where it is appointed, that Rendezvous be
kept eight days every two Months, for the space of ten Months: It is ordained,
that the first Rendezvous shall meet for this year, as is formerly appointed,
viz upon the 13, and 24. of August respective, and to continue together for
eight days, and the next Rendezvous to begin the first Wednesday of October,
and to continue together sixteen days; And for the subsequent Years, it is
appointed that the first Rendezvous shall begin the first Wednesday of June,
and to continue for sixteen days, and the next Rendezvous to be upon the first
Wednesday of October, and to continue then likewise for sixteen days, and so
forth to continue yearly thereafter; which two Rendezvouzes compleats the 32.
days, payable by the Country. IV. As to the ninth Article, It is appointed,
that the Militia Horse be worth ten Pound Sterling, conform to the Act of
Parliament, and be fifty eight Inches high, At least, that the Horse be of
sufficient size, fit for Service. V. It is hereby declared, that these that are
liable in the Fraction, shall pay to the Leaders of Horse, and Outreikers of
Foot, their proportional parts of what is due for the Pay both of Horse and
Foot, during the whole time they stay at the Rendezvouses. VI. Whereas, since
the Act of Parliament in the Year 1663, Establishing the Militia, by which
there are 800. Foot, and 88. Horse, appointed for the Shire of Dumfreis; There
is an late Act of Parliament disjoyning the Militia of the five Kirks of
Eskdale from the said Shire, and uniting the same to the Militia of Roxburgh,
whose proportion of the great Militia is one hundredth Foot and ten Horse: The
Lords of Council ordains the Proportion of the new Modeled Militia of these two
Shires to be regulat accordingly. Extracted by me
WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilij.


