An Answer of the States General of the United Provinces, To the Memorial of
the Extraordinary Ambassador of Sweden, Relating to a PEACE.
Thus Concluded in the Meeting of the High and Mighty Lords, States General, in
the Hague. November. the 17th, 1674.
THE States General of the United Provinces having seen and examined the
Memorials of the Here Ehrensteyn, Ambassador of the King of Sweden to this
State, which was delivered to them on the 28th of August, and the 24th of
October last: Have found themselves obliged to return him this Answer, That
they had hopes, that the Answer which they returned to him the 25th of July
last, was sufficient to satisfy the whole World, that They with their Allies
have always had, and yet have, a sincere and good Inclination to a lasting
Peace; And therefore it was not needful to use any more Arguments to persuade
them to that to which they are so much Inclined, and have done their uttermost
Endeavor. Yet their Lordships do find themselves highly engaged to his Majesty
of Sweden, for his great Zeal and Endeavors to turn a Destructive War into a
Peace; And that they will not be unmindful upon all occasions to give real
Demonstrations of their Thankfulness to his Majesty; And also upon all
occasions acknowledge the good Offices and Endeavors which the foresaid
Ambassador has done to the same End. But this State would willingly have been
dispensed from giving any more Arguments; the World being sufficiently
satisfied of their Peaceable Inclinations; especially, considering what they
had done in their former Answer: But considering the foresaid Ambassador, in
his foresaid Memorials, seems to suspect, That the Arms of this State, with
those of their Allies, do seem to set backward the Peace, and redound to the
Prejudice of some Princes and States, especially in Germany; For which Reason
their Lordships do find themselves absolutely obliged to Reiterate to the
foresaid Ambassador, That it cannot be Imputed to Them, as being the Cause of
the present War, and of the Calamities that proceed from thence; And all the
World must know, That it did not a little trouble them, when his Majesty of
France was pleased to turn that Affection which his Majesty and his renowned
Predecessors have had for this State, into Anger and Indignation; And therefore
they hope his Excellency will be pleased to consider, That this State at that
time gave their Allies and Friends, as also His Majesty of Sweden, to
understand the Fear they had of the War which His Majesty of France would
Declare against them; For which reason they have done their uttermost by all
their Friends and Allies to divert His Majesty from this his Intention:
Declaring also, That with good Conscience they could say, They did not know of
any Treaty which they had made with His Majesty which they had broken; And yet
they are willing to give His Majesty all Contentment and Satisfaction for any
Offense they had Committed. But they were so unhappy, that all their Endeavors
which they had done by His Majesty, and all their Presentations by Message,
were without Success; And on the contrary, His Majesty has done his Endeavors
to draw the Friends of this State into a War against them: So that this State
leaves it to all the World to judge to whom this War, and all the Effects of it,
are to be Imputed; and whether any thing of this War may be Imputed to this
State, who have done all that was possible to continue in Peace with His
Majesty. And when it pleased God to give such Success to the Arms of His
Majesty, that this State was almost swallowed up, this State was not wanting in
their Endeavors to be released of this War, and to come to a Peace: But His
Majesty was pleased to propose such hard Conditions, that they were forced to
resolve to continue in War, notwithstanding the Dangers which did attend them.
And when His Majesty of Sweden was pleased, from a Generous Mind, for the good
of this State, to present his Mediation to His Majesty for the extinguishing of
this War; His Majesty was never pleased to explain himself in any Propositions
for a Peace; or at least those that were proposed were judged so Unreasonable,
that they were not to be accepted of. It is well known to all the World, That
the Allies of this State did well foresee, with Compassion, the Effects of this
War. The King of Spain was the first, who not being engaged, that assisted this
State; and His Majesty the Elector of Brandenburgh was the first that engaged
with them as a Party; and His Majesty the Emperor came in to the Treaty, to
assist the foresaid Elector; which was so ill resented by His Majesty of
France, that the Spanish Netherlands suffered as much by the French Army before
as after the War was Declared between the two Kings. His Majesty fell also so
heavy upon the Dominions of the Elector of Brandenburgh that he was forced to
seek out for his own security. So that this State finding themselves stripped
of all Supplies of his Majesty of Spain, and the Emperor, and Brandenburgh, and
destitute of all Allies; So that it must be reckoned as a wonderful favor of
God, that they being destitute of all Allies, and getting no Honorable Terms
of Peace of His Majesty of France, notwithstanding a^ (...) they should enter
into a nearer Alliance with the Empire, and Spain, and the Duke of Lorrain,
there being no other way in the eye of Reason to help themselves; So that the
Reason of these Alliances must be retorted upon those that were the Cause of
them, and not upon the States. So that there is no Persons of Honor, but will
give Praise and Honor to this State, for their continuing faithful to what
they have promised to their Allies, who engaged themselves with them, in the
time of their Straits and Necessities; And the States are bound in faithfulness
to declare, That their renowned Allies have Declared as occasion has presented
it self; and demonstrated, that they are always inclined to a lasting and
durable Peace; and that they had not the thoughts to seek the suppression of
others, further than related to their own welfare and security. And that all
their Allies, in all their Treaties, have inserted as a special Ingredient, the
Preservation of the Westphalia Treaty. So that it is no small trouble to this
State, that the foresaid Ambassador seems to suspect, that this State with
their Allies were of Sentiment to break the Westphalia Treaty, or to infringe
the least part of it, and thereby give his Majesty of Sweden occasion to stand
up for the Preservation thereof. For this State have formerly declared, and do
now declare to the Ambassador and Mediator, That they with their Allies were
always ready, and now are, to give to His Majesty of Sweden such Security, that
they do not intend any thing to the least prejudice of the Westphalia Treaty,
as he himself shall desire of them, when His Majesty shall be pleased to give
them the like Security, that so all Suspicion of this nature may be taken away
from each other.

This State must needs acknowledge, That they cannot apprehend why this
Ambassador and Mediator should propose his Opinion, as that this State do show
the less Inclination to the Peace, by reason of the League which is lately made
with the Elector of Brandenburgh, the Duke of Brunswick and Luningburgh, they
Employing their Arms against his Majesty of France; as though thereby the Peace
was made the more difficult and that thereby the Arms of these tended to the
oppressions of the Standen of Germany, and that thereby the Treaty of
Westphalia would be in danger, of which His Majesty of Sweden stands as
Guaranteur. When As indeed the foresaid Alliance tends to no other end, but to
come to a good and lasting Peace, and the preservation of the Westphalia
Treaty; it being the only thing the foresaid Princes had in their eye in the
making of this Alliance; so that the foresaid Princes have the same thing in
their eye as His Majesty of Sweden has so many times declared to have, having
nothing in their aim but the Common Good; they pretending to nothing else in
the Treaty of Peace, but a good and lasting Peace, and the preservation of the
Westphalia Treaty; having taken Arms for no other end than to preserve the
Emperor as Head of the Empire, and the Decrees of the Empire, in those good and
honorable Intentions for which they were made, they themselves being Members
of that honorable Body; so that it would seem very strange to this State, That
the Ambassador and Mediator should express himself so suspiciously in his
foresaid Memorials, with relation to this Alliance: If they were not fully
satisfied of his upright and sincere Intentions for the forwarding of a Peace,
and of those good offices which he has done to that end; and that those former
expressions do only proceed from the fear that possesses his mind, That the
foresaid Princes have only engaged themselves for particular ends; and that
thereby the good work which he with so much trouble has begun should be
retarded: But their Lordships now believing that the foresaid Ambassador is now
convinced, as indeed the truth is, That these Princes have only engaged
themselves into these dangers, only to follow their Head and decrees of the
Emperor, without reflection or relation to any particular Interest, but only to
bring the Empire to a desired Peace, and the differing parties to quiet again;
do hope that the Ambassador will think them worthy of praise and honor in
this their good Intentions; and it is hoped His Majesty will not stand in their
way, but will, so much as belongs to him as a Mediator, add as much as can be
desired to the same (...) This State (...) very (...) Allies cannot subsist in
the Empire, without some prejudice to the Standen: But yet this State and their
Allies have done and yet do their endeavors to prevent all prejudice that
might come to the Empire thereby; and to bring their forces into the lands of
the enemy; but they cannot believe that his Majesty of Sweden will look upon it
as unreasonable, and as a breach of the Westphalia Treaty, That the Emperor and
the Princes thereof do use their Arms to force the King of France to go with
his Army out of the Empire, and leave them in quiet, from those many
oppressions which they have so often felt; for otherwise the Empire would be
lest as a prey to those that will but attack it: And this State supposes, that
not only they, but the whole World must judge with them, That the zeal of those
that seek to maintain their own freedoms, notwithstanding the dangers that
attend them, are worthy of great praise, and that such a defense is permitted
to all: But on the contrary it is a plain infringing of the Westphalia and
Akens Treaty without consent, nay against the wills of the Standen of the
Emperor, and the King of Spain, to march with great Armies over the Lands and
Jurisdictions of the Emperor, especially those that would not join with His
Majesty, or those that seemed the most convenient for him to attain his ends,
therewith using them as enemies, taking away, demolishing, or fortifying at his
pleasure such Places as he thought good: And therefore with reason we may
expect, that His Majesty of Sweeden, as being Guarenteur of the Westphalia, and
Akens Treaties, will show his displeasure against those that were the Authors
and disturbers of the Rest of Europe, by so needless, and so unrighteous a War
as this is: Who having no regard to Treaties and Agreements, have brought the
Empire, and their neighboring Country into a flame; And that His Majesty will
not molest those that stand up only in their own defense for the public quiet,
without having respect to any particular advantage of their own; in regard they
have no other way left open for them. This State does acknowledge with all
thankfulness, and praise the goodness of the great God, that has restored
their (...) and has released them from a great part of this War, and do with
nothing less than that they were wholly released, and their Allies brought
again to Rest and Peace, in regard they by experience do know what it is to
have the burden of a War: But this State do not know wherein they have been
wanting in their endeavors, for the forwarding of the Peace; and are willing
to be informed from the foresaid Ambassador, not in general terms which cannot
be answered; but in specie, and in particular, what they could have done more;
but this State supposes, that they should stand guilty before God and all the
World, and that they could never answer it, if they should not be faithful to
their Allies in what they engaged, who were stirred up by God to assist them in
their troubles; and this only is the cause why they persisted, That the Duke of
Lorrain's Agents ought to have pasports to appear at the place of Treaty,
declaring that otherwise they could not proceed: And they suppose there is none
that can say they did ill in this respect, for demanding that, to which they
were bound to by Treaty, which is not denied to any: This being a House which
is reckoned for one of the Illustrious in Europe; and one, as His Majesty has
many times declared, that he was willing to restore to his Country again: So
that the retardment ought not to be imputed to this State with any reason, nor
to any of their Allies, who in this respect have demanded nothing but what was
reasonable in it self: But it must be imputed to His Majesty of France, who
has refused a thing that is so common and customary, and yet persisted
therein; whereby he evidently declares, he has no intention to come to a
Treaty of Peace. And what relates to the release of Duke William of
Furstenburgh, which the Ambassador insists upon, His Excellency may take
notice, That this State, nor none of their Allies, excepting those whose
Subject he was, had any hand in his Imprisonment, neither had they any knowledge
thereof: But it seems strange that this State should be solicited to
Intercede for a Person that openly vented against the Ambassadors of this
State, and declared as a thing in which he much gloried, That he had been
Fifteen years busy to bring our Country into that Labyrinth in which at
present it is involved; and that according to his own saying, he had been the
Author of so much mischief as was now brought to pass, with the shedding of so
much innocent blood as has been shed, not only in our Country, but also in
Germany; So that this State, and as they believe all Christian Princes must
look upon him as a disturber of the common good, and that the great God has
not only righteously let him feel a Prison, but may suffer something else to
fall upon him as a punishment for his most wicked deeds; of which he himself
has made his boasts. And therefore it will be very unacceptable to peaceable
men, That a Treaty should be broke off for not releasing so great a disturber:
And though this State would have been glad to have heard that His Majesty of
France had pitched upon a place of Treaty, requisite for all our renowned
Allies, or at least that His Majesty of Sweden had pleased to have done it, in
regard they would not be willing to have this good work come to nothing;
therefore this Ambassador and Mediator may declare to His Majesty of Sweden,
That this State do leave it to His Majesty to pitch upon what place he shall
think best; whether it be Franckfort, Hamburgh, or Aken, where it was before,
of which the foresaid Ambassador has made so often mention; and that this
State are well assured, That their renowned Allies will make no difficulty to
send their Ambassadors to any of the foresaid places; and desire from our
hearts, that any of the foresaid places may be chosen, the sooner the better;
and that God would be pleased to bless the good intentions of His Majesty of
Sweden, and the unwearied endeavors of this Ambassador, that they may carry
away the honor and the glory, That by their endeavors Europe may be freed
from so great a War, and brought to quiet again; to which end this State will
contribute what is possible for them to do.

Thus concluded in the meeting of the High and Mighty Lords, States General, in
the Hague. November the 17th. 1674.
FINIS

