A New CASE Put to an Old LAWYER, OR, Lawyers look about you, FOR The Case is
altered quoth Ployden.

At a conference held by Prag a slitter of Causes, and Prog an Attorneys Clark
of the one party, and Bold-face a Barrater; Alias a Bargisters Puny, and
Hold-Case a Dependant to the Chancery, of the other part.

CONCERNING Those two honorable and conscientious Courts, viz. Committees of
Grievances and of Referrees; where causes are ended with all speed, and without
Bribes or Fees, to the grief of most Lawyers and their Clarks.

LONDON; Printed for William Ley, and are to be sold at his shop at
Pauls-Chane, 1656.

A NEW CASE Put to an Old Lawyer, etc.
Prag. BRother Prog, welcome to Town from the Western Circuit; you have had a
fine time to range about the Countries, and to fill your pockets with nise
prize Moneys, and such Law trinkets at the Country Sizes; you have had a good
Harvest, I hope, you look so brisk.


Prog. Brother, it is good making Hay while the Sun shines: I have been (as you
say) compassing the earth, and I had pro selytes wheresoever I came; my old Mr.
Bateman who has been an old Fox in the Kennel of the Law, had his hands full of
Trials, and then I could not want Fees, Prag, and I made no scruple of
conscience to swallow them, all was Fish that came to our Nets, and we Fish in
troubled Waters; the Country-Hobs brought in Tribute to us, and swarmed at the
Assizes like Flies about a Hony-Pot; when they hear of a Tax or a Prize Money,
they hum, and mumble and grumble, but sure they take us for their Save-Alls, as
indeed we are, for we prick them on fast to our sleeves till they end in a
snuff and spend all they have: I till thee they care not how the Plough goes,
but how their Writs and Subpaenaes take: Our Writings they take for Canonical:
by our Tricks in Law we can fetch out their Crowns, and make their Angels fly
into our pockets clean out of their sight: I found special gleaning there after
my Mrs. Raking, but that Harvest is gone till Mid-Lent come. Well, shall we
dissolve a little Fee or a Bribe into Canary at our Meeting?


Prog. I Will go with you because we shall meet our Brothers, Bold-face and
Hold-Case at the Devil by St. Dunstans, and there we will confer together, for I
have matter of Importance to declare to you.


Pr^g. Content; for I would hear some News; the next Client shall be sure to
pay for our Mirth, and therefore we will be free: We know how to cut large
thongs of other sides: I tell the Prag, our Profession is the sublimest part of
high Mystery; there are diverse hard Landlords who squeese their Tenants by
Rack Rents, but we not only distrain the Tenants Purses, but we extract the
very Landlords blood and Lands, and whole Lordships by our scribbling on a
tenterd Sheepskin.


Prag. It Is so, Brother Prog, for my Suitor old Mr. Holdfast has told me, that
when he first knew how to make an Indenture, and a old Noverint Uniuersi, he
had but one four pence half penny in the house, and owed his Landlord a whole
years Rent of 6. s. 8. d. for his Cottage, and had but one poor Hock-Bed for
himself and three children, and that without Sheets; and was glad of an old
Sheeps-head and Gather with a three penny Barley Loaf once in a week, and
neither Horse nor Cow, Cock nor Hen, and yet by living near to a Market Town he
pretending his Skill to the Law, did by his little Skill make a shift in two
years to pick up half twenty pounds, and with some of that got him a black
Cloak with a Velvet Cape, a one-eard spavin'd Horse, and a buckrom bag with
three Causes in it, and came up at the Term time as brisk as an old Fox in a
Doublet, and sped his Causes, and returned again with looks and Language among
the Country Bumpkins as lofty as if he had been one of the Masters of the
Chancerie, or a Sergeant at Law, and in twenty years space writes Esquire, and
possesses 1000 l. per Ann. keeps his Coach and four Horses, fares like a
Prince. And I that am but one of the whelps of that Litter, yet you see how I
am maintained under him till I be ready to prog for my self: And I am a pretty
expert Setter at the Game already; one Michaelmas Term more, and another
Circuit will flesh me for prey, and I have Tallons and Appetite eager as a
Spar-hawk to seize a Client.


Prog. See, yonder come our Fellows, birds of Prey and the same Feather; true
Voragoes; excellent Horse-Leeches; special Spunges; dextrous Pick-Pockets;
nimble Rook^; their tongues are as nimble as their fingers, and both as nimble
as an Eeles tail: Come, let us bear near up to'm to know how the rack rides.
Fitly met Comrades; how stands the Case with you you two?


Bold-face. Well, for we feel no want; the Country was fat and full against
our coming, and we laid aboard stoutly; we had special Supporters met us
wherever we sojourned, we opened the Country men's cases and Capons, happy was
he that could first present us with fat fees; we began to suspect that they got
their money noughtilie they were so earnest to part with them: They murmr at
their Landlords, and mutter at their Parsons, and curse their Collectors of
Taxes, but dare not vent a syllable against our Politicians of the Law; we have
the length of their feet; and what shift soever they make for the other three
sorts of Drawers, they will be sure not to starve their Lawyers; we have them
at our Devotion; when they offer a case to us, they are sure to pay and to pray
to. But why prate we here? letts into our Harbor, and show the Vintners
Gallyfoists that it is no vocation with us; but we by the help of the Summers
fagary at the Northern Assizes, can be as jovial as in the midst of Michaelmas
Term.


Hold-Case. Tut, why stay we here? I Will enter, and it shall be a
Leather-Doublets Fee that I intend to digest in good Sack amongst you; I Will
never demur upon it; comes Fellows; I hope you will not stay till you be
subpaenaed into the Court: Here Is special Sack that's a sufficient lure to draw
in, and as bird-lime, and catch Game. I tell you Comrades, that the day is our
own. the Parson dare not come near to peep into a Tavern for fear of scandal,
and the Soldiers Pay will not reach it; and the Citizens what by paying of
Taxes decay of Trading, and finding their Wives rich clothes for their pride,
seldom adventure into Taverns; and when they do, alas it is half a pint, Club,
and away to their Shops; so that we and our Clients have the only preferment
to drink Wine and truly we may well do it, because it comes on free cost to us;
and our Clients take a price in paying, because they hope we will the sooner
further their cause: Is not this true my blades? And therefore lets enjoy our
selves without melancholy?


Bold-Face. Hang melancholy, our Fortunes fall to our hands: Its enough for
old sequestered Parsons, and decayed Esquires, and Knights who have lost their
Estates, for their consciences to be dull and melanchollick; but wiser then so;
we are of that Tribe who can sell conscience; and if it come to be debated
either to part with our moneys or our conscience, we know which shall be first
thrust out of doors; and for certain, Westminster Hall and Lawyers Chambers are
not fit places for conscience to set up her Trade in. Was she not banished out
of England? If she be not there is no abiding for her in our Purfues or
Jurisdictions. I am sure there has been many Declarations, and Judgments, and
Executions against her, and many motes and private debates to cast out her
Suits; and if at any time it is admitted, it appears in Forma pauperis, and that's
merely pro forma, for fashion sake, to make a mock of her; and indeed, it is a
good President all that come to us in hope to speed, to come well lined with
Cash more then conscience. Pish, lets not talk more of her, for she is at best
but an old stale Lady out of fashion and favor too. Come now, lets discourse
of some News, Brother Prag, you said you had some matter of consequence to be
heard; out with it we pray you, and lets all partake of it.


Prag. Truly so I fear you will before you would; for I have been plodding and
contriving how to avoid or overthrow it, for I love it as Cats love Mustard, or
as the Devil loves Holy Water; it makes my hair bristle when I think on it; all
my my hopes are, that are too good to continue long. I believe you heard of
them at the Country Assizes, they are called the Committee for References;
People are mainly taken with them, and speak high in their commendation, and
that they do a world of good to Debtors and Prisoners, and all that are vexed
with Chancery Suits etc. and tedious Law-cases for they do that in an Afternoon
which we hang and draw out in Chancery six or seven years; ye know all what
fine fetches we have to spin out a cause in any of our Coverts and Cages.


Bold-Faco. Well, is this the News and certain, does it so startle you that it
makes you look as if you were possessed with Essex, or a Kentish-Ague? It
frights you as if you was served with a Warrant for Jamaica or Hispaniola.
Come, come, lets pass off the thoughts of it, for it makes you look as if you
had the Yellows, or black-Jaundies: Hanged, it will cause you to fall into a
Consumption, and to end your days as Judas, in despair and a halter; for my
part, I love no such Purgation, though I confess there is many have tauen a
turn and one slip out of the world, for less Villainies then we are guilty of,
for we rob more in our chambers then they do upon the highway: Lawyers and
their Clarks are as dangerous for men's purses as Dr. Nicholas Clarks; our Pens
are as bad as their Pistols; for they make men only to stand, but we make them
to fall: A Hare has not more Muses then we have sleights, traverses,
compassings, windings, turnings, wheelings, falsifyings, broyls and turmoyls in
our Game at Law: Will. the Conqueror was our good Founder, and all the Rings
have been special Benefactors to our cunning Society and who knows but that the
Archbishops and Bishops, and all the old Priests followed our Courts with
constant fee, and were excellently versed in our Muse; nay, the poor Curates of
10 l. per ann. would sue at Law for tithe Eggs, or Geese, or for two penny
offerings: At Easter Westminster Hall and all our Inns swarmed with that Tribe
of Levi, but since the Reformation they are poor, and now are quiet by force:
Cursed Gows have short horns; the Presbyters teeth water to be in our Court, but
that they dare not for fear of scandal or ejection: Well, for my part if all
agree to it since we have pretty well wetted our whistles, lets hear this
matter, and debate on it.


Hold-Case, alias Long-Suit. Agreed, it stands us upon; for if they stand, we
fall; and if they come in, we must pack out; but yet they will find more to
rout us and root us up, then they did by civil Lawyers, Doctors and Proctors,
or then they did of the old Prelates, Bishops, Deans, Chapiters, Archdeacons
and their Officials; we have stronger Forts then theirs, we are Juro Divino;
weel find them a little more Play; our Dependancies and Relations are firmer,
and knit and tied Legaliter by Law, yes Statute Law: If we look to our friends
Sublime and tough for Law, what say you to that, vast Nest of Wasps,
and-Hornets, and Horse-Leaches, Attorneys, Soliciters and their Clarks, with
Scriveners, Indenture-makers, and other Hanibies? Besides, my noble Slaves,
Have we not in all the Countries Under Sheriffs and Bailiffs, and Bums,
Informers, and Setters, and Promoters; which are as so many Decoys, Cheats, and
mere Petty fogging Forsts, and Hackney-Jades for us and our Masters to ride on
at our Pleasure?


Prag. Handsomely and dexterously pleaded Brother Hold-Case, thou may, if the
Chancery-court continues in its highness, come to be one of the Masters, for
thou have those qualities that advances men of that Robe of subtilty, Eloquence
and Confidence; and now pray hear what I think of those that are commonly
called REFERREES, I do not say but that the men are noble, and honest, and fit
Instruments for honest Employments, and act according to equity and a good
conscience; but what is that to us, or what need we be afraid of their Court? for
I tell you merry blades, that alas they take but our leavings, and meddle only
with poor Petitioners which we have long ago had the pulling of, and because
they had no more feathers, were not worth our consideration, and so were either
hung up as dead flies, and fowls in our Courts, or else they meddle with such
cases and persons whose Creditors have arrested and laid up in a Counter, or
some other of the Devils Purlews, for moneys which they (being in Law) borrowed
to feed us withal, and they being spent, what care we what becomes of them; for
he or they that come amongst us when all their Angels are flown, may do as
those who come to see a Play without money, they might stand without to be
laughed at, but should not come in to hear or see how the game is played: I tell
you the truth, I went one day to be a Spectator and a hearer at White Hall, and
at first entrance I spyed two or three of old Mr. Squeeze-Purses Clyents, and
three or four of Sergeant Horse-Leaches decayed followers, who looked as though
they had been Prison-powder'd, and were as you know, in such a Term outsworn by
two or three of the old Velvet-Doublet-Knights of the Post, because they wanted
moneys to fee and to feed the two cormorants any longer; their Petitions were
not (as they might and should indeed have been) made against the Lawyers, but
against their merciless Creditors, and so they had their freedom from
imprisonment, paying some little pittance from out of their weekly labor to
their creditors; for we pull^d and eat the two Geese, and the creditors got a
Feather; some of them indeed said that they had been 10. 12. years in the
Chancery, and I know not how long before at the Common Law. And at those words
I thought and doubted I should have heard some of Comittee censure, the
proceedings of our Courts, but they did not speak any thing to that, but bad
the poor sneaks be diligent in Labor, and careful to pay their Creditors as
God should enable; and added in the end, Come no more into Law, nor meddle not
with Lawyers, etc. and so dismissed them; and what hurt is all this to us? I add
one thing more to comfort us; Alas good souls! they do sit, it is true, and are
judicious persons; but they have no power to bind or loose, or to determine a
cause, or force any to stand to their Orders or Determinations; persuade they
may, but not command obedience to their Decrees; and it is a doubt whether all
that they have done be availing and binding; or whether they sit now in
Parliament time; there is a buzzing and flying rumor, but it is no more that
they shall be confirmed, and have power to act by Authority of Parliament; it
may be so; what then? I Will declare to you my judgment (sly slaves) in this
particular, not to disparage our selves, but to our comfort, Are there any
hopes that such a conscientious Court of Equity and Charity should be now
erected and established de Novo? Who will plead for it? or petition to any
purpose to obtain it? First, not the Commissioners themselves; for it is a toil
and trouble to them and spends their Spirits, their time and their moneys too,
for they have but their labor for their pain and hard language, and deep
censures by too many of the Creditors for their good intentions, and their
place is imposed upon them, they never sought it; and what hopes are there I
say, that such a noble, just, and upright a Court as this is should continue
long, there being no Fees or means of Maintenance, and the men themselves are
so generous and Christianly spirited, that they scorn (that which our Tribe
most love) fat and frequent bribes, and daily Fees.

And further I say, if a company of poor, desparate and forlorn Prisoners and
Debtors should come and hang about the Parliament for the settlement of such a
Court, is it not first extrajudicial? May it not seem to tend to innovation in
the State, to introduce and establish a new Law? to be sure the Petitioners
will be (being poor) sonndly checked; for have not our Masters and Lords a great
voice in the House? and do you think that ever such a Petition will be granted
as long as they sit there? it being so contrary to our practice and profit, and
tending to the almost subversion? however to be a check and curb to all our
Inns of Court, and so not likely to pass current.

But to put the question one stop further, if it should, which I never fear it
will, yet I warrant you our Grandees will have the ordering of it, and the
Committee of REFERREES must be referred to them to State and Model; and they will
be sure to put in Objections enough against it, to demur to perfect it; and
when it is done it shall not want cautions, provisoes, and restrants, as I could
name some.

1. That it should not infringe the ancient Privileges of any Court of Law
established nor any old Lawyers. 2. That it should not bind any from Appeals to
our higher Courts if the parties have Moneys. 3. They should not meddle in
Arduis in hard Cases nor in rich men's Causes, but in trivial poor Cases. 4.
That they should not sit of themselves, but to have some of our Tribe to join
with them to spy out their intentions, and to give early intelligence to our
Masters. 5. That all Clients who would come in there, should first be well
pulled and fleeced by us who will be careful that they shall come poor enough
amongst them. 6. That they shall sit but once in seven years, and that in a
forenoon, and to loose their dinner for their pains. 7. That before they sit
they shall petition for leave of the Masters of the Chancery, or some others
well affected to the Law, and to have the Just Approbation of 300. Sergeants,
Eenchers and Barresters: 500. old lean faced Attorneys; and some 2000 of our
younger Fry-Clarks and such Sherks; there are other jerks and quirks for them,
but these my nimble Pate thinks fit for our good. And now I pray tell me my
jovial hearts, what reason have we to be afraid of such improbable, and almost
impossible News; hanged, lets have the other cup of Sack.



Prag. Admirably well pleaded arguing a sublime and zealous spirit for advance
of the Law; and I tell you, I could wish thy speech were presented to some
chief Officers; and I hold it sitting, if we intend our own good, to petition
some of our Grandees to endeavor to stop such petition if it should come in;
for though I am glad to hear what is spoken on our behalf; yet I assure I doubt
it much that such a thing may be effected, which I do for these reasons
following:

1. We all know that we are hated of all men, and not without cause; as for our
fees, and bribes, and deferring, and demurring in men's causes, and suffering,
and procuring their Ruin, and we are cursed as Foxes for woorying Lambs.

2. We are generally envied for our wealth; and many of us, if not most of us,
are suspected not to favor this present thing called Government, our
affections are of another bent: and then many of us have been of those
creatures that are called Delinquents and Mags, etc. and the world knows we are
settled on the Lees, and deserve a purgation. I know some great ones that fear
night and day, and expect a change, and think they have seen their best days.

3. That Court of REFERREES is known so much already and applauded, they are
judicious godly men, generally reputed such as are men of courage, fearing God,
and hating covetousness, and so unreprovable; they covet not (as we do too
much) any man's silver or gold: And then they are men that have swords by their
sides, and great supporters and then they do all (which we never did care to
do) for conscience and charity; and then (I speak it with grief) it is a more
honorable, necessary, and a juster course and Court then ever we intended to
hare set up: What think you these my masters speak truth (which we seldom do)
May it not be set up think you?


Bold-Face. Hang such puny spirits, I think you are turned Quaker; for my part
I see nothing as yet to fear, for men come as fast into nets as ever they did:
All men knows not of that Committee, and I intend to hinder it as much as I
can; I love it as I do sower Ale in Summer, or as Wasps do a Tar-Pot: However
the fattest Oxen will be sure to go first to the Slaughterhouse; such poor
squitterlings and dwinderlings as we are not regarded or looked upon; and to be
sure if I ever be brought into question; I Will do by my old rich Masters as Dr.
Duck did by the little Arch-Piship of Cant lay all the faults, and corruptions,
and deceits, on their shoulders, and many of them will bear a stout brunt; they
are well lined, and know their shifts and their falsehoods; if they do not, let
them suffer for their faults, for they deserve it.


Prag. Nay, there is more in it then so, for you cannot choose but hear how the
Parliament has set up an honorable Committee for Grievances; and if they
should be strict to relieve Petitioners, I doubt many of our Tribe will be
fetched in to answer for our former iniquities; however they will ease us of
many Clyents; for sure men will leave our Courts where they have been so
hurried and wooryed, and apply themselves there where they are sure to find
men of conscience to determine their business without Fees or under feelings;
what think you of this news? I doubt a poor Michaelmas Term: I protest it puts
me to such shrugs, that I am as afraid to be brought in to their Court, as a
Spaniard does to see an English Frigot: And truly I have been so much used to
the Art of drawing, draining and purloining men's Pockets, that I had rather
steal then beg; and work is counted so poor and base, that I had rather hang
then labor: and for to be a Soldier and fight for 5. s. alas! Lawyers know how
to make men jar and quarrel, but love not to come into danger themselves: I
never read of any Lord General or stout Soldier was bred up a Lawyer; Scholars
indeed to often venture to the Wars, and prove good Commanders, for poverty
forces them out; but as for our Society, the rattling Drums passing but by a
window, shake my spirits so, that they make my hand write as though I had the
Palsy in my joints: If our Trade thrives not, I Will turn a Gentleman's Bailiff,
or some Informer to a covetous Landlord, or else get into a Country Belfree
and teach rimmer and Accidence Boys for 2. d. pe week. I am looking to provide
against a storm, for I doubt it will fall before we think on it.


Prog. Well Brother Prag, I doubt it is too true as you have spoken: I must
confess, (though you know we love it not) that our Profession is generally
corrupted, there is few honest or upright Practitioners amongst us: Thou know
that CuRSITORS OFFICE, Oh! it is a subtle deluding Covert of politic Rooks;
there is a knot of FERRITS and POLECATS, shat know how to; hunt their GAME into
their CONY-BOROUGHS, and there woory them to the purpose: we have other most
intricate and exquisite coops and cages to keep young Suitors fast in also: Ah!
'twas a fine time for our trade when Court-hand writing, and bald curtald
Latin Writs were all in fashion; whenas no Vicar, or Parson, or Curate could
expound it, but the Undersheriff, or some old Attorney in a whole county could
tell what to make of our Writs and Warrants; the country people would stare at
a Subpaena, at if it had been a spel made by an old conjurer; and when it was
politickly and powerfully pronounced and served, would so startle the poor
Farmers, that their ghastly looks when they come home would frighten their
wives, and so scare their very cows, that they would be horn mad to see their
Master look as if he were run out of his wits; he comes home so masked, that he
fetches his poor cattle and horses straw for hay, and chaff for corn.


Hold-case. Well my trusty Trojans, you have uttered your Judgments, and I have
heard the case opened; and I hope 'twil be as my Brother Prog has spoken, that
is, That we are so many, and so strongly rooted, that we shall not easily be
routed; and yet I confess the sitting of the Parliament a little startles me,
for I saw it in the last Politicus, that they are about to oversee us; but may
not two or three hundred thousand pounds purchase our freedom? Such a sum or a
greater may be quickly gathered up in all our quarters and divisions; and good
store of moneys has a strong influence among us, I am sure they have: And such
a sum what is it amongst so many? Ha my hearts! When I consider our numbers and
riches, even us here in and about London and Westminster, such a sum is
nothing: Homer does not more exquisitely number up the Ships that sailed to
Troy, then I can do our Brigades and our Palaces; as to give you a short
recital of them, in London there is tha^ strong and spacious Guild Hall, Oh what
bawling, and squalling, and misealling, and brawling may you hear there four
days in the week! Oh! there is special trading: quick returns, nimble
Catch-poles, sure Tenter-hooks of our side, but leave them and come to our end
of the Town, and there have we not first two Temples well replenished, not a
Chamben empty; there is that notorious walk for the Knights of Post, who trudge
round the pillars like old blind Mill-horses, and indeed do deserve a sound
lash for their work. What think you of Sergeants Inn well seated and stored,
especially in a full term time: There Is also Lincolns-Inne, and Grayes-Inne, two
grand Societies for practice and profit: Have we not also Davies-Inne,
Bernards-Inne, Purnivals-Inn, Staples-Inn, Claffords-Inne, Clements, Inn,
Lyons-Inn, New Inn, etc. For Offices how many; as Cursisters Office, six Clarks
Office, with -- all foully full. There is enough of us in all these places, and
in all England besides, that if our hearts were as stout as our heads are
crafty, might of our selves engage the Spaniard, and if we were put to it,
could (propriis sumptibus) maintain the weight and charges of that War. Now my
sure Trouts, can you fear such a thing as our decay of Trade, or a bousting of
us from our places: it is true, we are as bad as bad can be, but will not our
moneys (think you) stand us in stead when we shall be put to it? this, this is
my hopes, and if this fail, I give all for lost except I can support my
Fortunes by joining with some old widow in the Country, and to get an old
house over my head, and feed upon lusty bag-puddings, and old reez'd Bacon;
some way or other I must invent, for I had rather be advanced in a snickle,
then to go a shit-board in one of our Frigots; Cannon Bullets are hard cases to
digest; they bawl far louder then any Attorneys or Counselors do in
Westminster Hall; Our Tribe has been long on multiplication; we are like Frogs,
Locusts and Caterpillars, for number, and if we taught the Rule of Reduction,
(which is but fitting) I am sure I shall out for one; but it angers me most to
think how all sorts of people will laugh at us, and stont us, none will pity
us, so that I shall be ashamed almost to see my own face in a glass.


Bold-face. Well Gentlemen, let me speak my mind, and in a word or two, and so
at present lets part; I say, that I doubt: our numbers are like our abuses, too
too many; every one does so exclaim against us, especially for our pride, being
but inferior Clarks, and yet our legs are set out with silk Stockins, and
Spanish shoes, with our Ribans of all colors and beauties, our clothe of the
purest cloth, if not Silks, with our heads persumed, and curled, and crisped,
with Rings of Gold in our Band-strings, O this wasteful garb in our attire,
makes all men to hate us, and desire that we may be well fleeced as we have
done others, and therefore lets comfort our selves with the other cup of Sack, for
I fear that a day of reckoning is approaching against our numbers and manners;
and if so, we may be glad of a cup of six shilling-beer, and a piece of monkey
Suffolk-Cheese for our Dinners: And this I do add to all the rest, if we do
suffer we cannot excuse our selves, or accuse others; and so I am resolved to
endure the worst and say nothing, for we have our deserts come what will.


FINIS.

