A New-come Guest to the TOWN.

That is, The Descriminant Oath which the Earl of Newcastle imposes upon the
County and City of YORK, and all others under his Command and power,
violently abusing them to the maintaining of this unnatural War against the
Parliament, to the ruin of the KINGDOM, and themselves.

WRITTEN By a Yorke-Shire GENTLEMAN, for the good (especially) of his
COUNTRIE-MEN.

With a particular List of the Names of the most Violent Papists (men of that
quality) and others that bare ARMS, or are ayding and assisting to the Earl
of NEW CASTLE.



LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, at Graies-Inne Gate. June the 5th. 1644.

AN Oath taken by the Gentry, and Inhabitants of the CITY and County of
YORK.
I A. B. do hereby testify, and declare, that our Sovereign Lord King
Charles is the true and lawful King of England, and of all his other
Dominions; and that neither the two Houses of Parliament, the people nor any
part of them have any power, or authority over him, or the Crown; neither
ought they, or any of his Subjects of this Kingdom of England, or his other
dominions, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms against his Sacred
Majesty, His person, his Crown, his Generals or Soldiers authorized by him,
nor may they by any authority or pretense whatsoever, make or levy War within
this Kingdom, or his other dominions, or any way use his Royal authority, or
name for that purpose, without his evidence, and public consent before
obtained. And I do further swear, that I will bear true faith, and Allegiance
to His Sacred Majesty, and his Crown; and to my might and power will assist
him, his Generals and all under their command, against all such as have taken,
or shall take up Arms against him, or that have or shall take up arms within
this Kingdom, without his Majesty's evident public, or real Authority, and
especially against Kobert Earl of Essex, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, (pretended
generals for the Parliament) and all their associates and confederates, and
all others whatsoever that derive not their authority by particular Commissions
from His Majesty, and his Generals.

And I do further declare, from the bottom of my heart, that diverse of the
Scottish Nation, having presumed to enter into this Kingdom in a warlike
manner without his Majesty's evident and public authority first obtained, and
published: I will readily, and to the utmost of mine ability with the hazard
of my life, and fortunes, assist his Majesty, his Generals, and all under
their Commands, in resisting, opposing; and pursuing such Scotts, in a hostile
way, as rebels, and traitors against his Majesty, and enemies to the Crown of
England. And I do further swear, that I will to my power assist, and defend
all such as shall take this Oath, in pursuance of the same, and particularly
defend this City, and Garrison of York, and during my residence there, oppose
all such, as shall make any attempt against it, and all such plots, and
designs as shall come to my knowledge, that may be prejudicial to His
Majesty's service, or destructive to the Forces raised by His Majesty's
Commissions. I will from time to time discover to His Mai^sties General, or
the Commander in Chief of this County, and in their absence, to the Chief
Officer for the time being of this Garrison, and all this I do^ un^^inedly
swear, without any equivocation or mental reservation, so help me God.

A brief essay or discourse upon the same.
I Mean not to spatter or dash ink upon any person of either whose fame, or
modera^e credit. I am neither by nature, nor cust^me a man of lower counsels,
and besides born by Religion, and the gravitie o^ my calling, summon me to
beware of ^ayl^ng language, which is none other thing then, Sputum Diaboli the
Phlegm, and Spawling of the Devil. Strong ^nes never g^i^ed upon any but weak
heads. Wisest men are erned and won by soft words and strong arguments. I am a
Yorkshire man by birth and most by resience, and was so long an eye witness
and spectator of this Tragedy of civil War, till the S^ag was all on fi^e.
That which I undertake is no more, then to bestow a few pen fulls of Ink, and
one half sheet of paper, to show that the taking of this Oath, can hold no
proportion with the deliberate, and advised actions of a man either religious,
and fearing God, or of a man no more than morally rational and prudentiall.

And first I would have him who is concerned herein to observe with what a
specious show the crafts-men of this Oath have laid the first stone of it, to
wit, in the very words of the Oath of Supremacy, that our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, is the true and lawful King of England, and of all other his
Dominions. Well said; but why do you not go on, and that neither the Pope not
any other f om him, etc has power to dispose of his Kingdom, etc. but of the
Pope, and those Ecclesiastical pow rs, not a word or syllable in this oath.
You are apprehended in the very act, and the case is so plain, that impudence
it self cannot deny, but that it is done to advantage the Papists in their
Diana of the Pops Supremacy and jurisdiction over the Crowns, and Scepters of
all Emperors, Kings and Princes. We all know the two breves of Pope Pius the
fifth, to the Papists of England, and the letter of Cardinal Bellarmine to
Blackwell the Archpriest, the declaring the sinfulness, and unlawfulness of
that Oath of Supremacy, assuring that it cannot be taken with a good
Conscience, that it is destructive to one of the maine Articles of the Romish
faith, the primacie and superintendencie of the Sea of Rome: that it is to be
retracted, and rep nted by those who have taken it out of weakness or fear,
etc. King James that learned and notable Prince: took pen in hand, and when ted
his style masculinely to discover these grand juglings and impostures in a just
tractate, which is to be red in his works, the more hate and blame will lie
upon those who pretending zeal to the service of his son, will thus expose,
him and his Crown, to the greatest enemies that ever the Crown of England
had. The Sea of Rome.

Secondly I would have it observed, that if this Oath and the purport of it be
bolted to the bran and considered a basso ad altum, and the fairest
construction allowed unto it that may be in reason pretended unto, that thus
much will follow by good conclusion, that if not only the King (whom God bless
and whom we will not asperse with suspicions) but if the Soldiers and
Generals who have Commission from him (many of which without any breach of
Charity at all, according to the strictest Casuists in point of Conscience, I
may and ought to be jealous of) should strive or have it in design to
introduce Popery, Liberty, and profaneness, Tyranie, and Slavery, Monopolies,
and Taxes, even elotione, and the bre^king of this Parliament and consequently
of all others ever to succ^ed, further then to be merely nominall, I am bound
(if a wr^ng and unjust Oath could bind a man to any more then to repentance)
both not to resist, and even to assist them therein, in the contriving and
incompassing their wicked designs. Nay nothing in this Oath withstands, why
the swearer of it should not introduce Iudaisme, Mahometanisme, Paganism, if
the Generals and Soldiers who have Commission derived from the KING, would
have it so.

Thirdly, it may well be noted, in how broad a difference, the National
Covenant (which is their Cor dolium, and whereat they so much storm) and this
Oath does run. That propounds the defense of the person and just rights of the
King, the settling of the Protestant Religion, the due liberty of the Subject,
the privileges of Parliament, the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy, the union
and uniformity of two Nations, whom God and nature have made one in deviding
them from all the world, uniting them in one Island, and under one Monarch, etc.

These are heads worthy to be the theme of an Oath, and baits which may
catch prudent, and good men, and even warm and kindle a man by degrees from
nutrality to Zeal.

This Oath leads a man on in a blind obedience, says not a word of the Cause
or reasons of either offensive or defensive arms, but thinks to over awe the
conscience with persons, first the King (which indeed is a venerable name, and
wherein it weighs less then ever it did, it is principally occasioned by those
who pretends to be his friends and supporters, then forsooth, his Generals and
Soldiers a generation of men, whom if we had never known or fell, perhaps we
might have had some tolerable conceits of them, but whilst we k^ow there is
nothing, less then any thing of either a Christian, Gentleman, or Soldier in
very many of them, that they have spoiled and laid wast the largest and
goodliest Country in the Kin^s domminions and behaved themselves as so many
Bores in a garden, o the infinite and irreparable prejudice of others, and even
with little or none advantage to their own side, that the general himself
however he may pretend to point of honor and Courtship, and indeed is a man of
more state and difficult access then the King is by many degrees, and can carry
himself stately, keep distance entertain a Mistress, etc. yet in truth is one
who never laid any Religion to heart, nor has any thing of a Soldier in him,
but is wholly steered by Gene all King, Sir Thomas Glenham Sir William
Widrington, Colonel Goring whilst he was there, etc. men who have not an Acre
of land in our County; Lastly that the most of the Captains and Soldiers are
Tigers and Bears for cruelty, bores for wast and devastations, Swine for
Drunkenesse, Goats and Stallions for Lust, etc. in so much as Captain Leg,
when John Owsman the Postmaster of York did come and tamely enough charge him
for violating the Laws of Hospitality so far as having, the Command of his
whole house he had got his daughter with Child, the Captain took it very ill
that he should complain, and said he had done more then so, he had lain with
all in his house, save him self, and his Oastler.

Lastly, I desire the grand imposture of all may be detected which indeed has
been the Master piece of their game, and whereby they have gained more
prosylites then by all the rest of their play, which is the frequent using the
name of the King and his sacred Majesty and the like, though in truth the same
observations that S. Aug. made of the Pelagians, does here take the place that
they did fill their mouths, and with the word Grace, grace, but it was only
frangere invidiam, to break the stroke of envy: so these men cry, Treason,
Treason, Rebellion, Reb^llion, the King, his sacred Person and Crown, when all
is but to put some seeming pacification on the minds of the vulgar and simple,
and to cover over with some modesty their dangerous designs, and uncomly
practizes.

And m^rke I pray you further how twice in this mould of their Oath, they join
together the King his Generals, and Soldiers as if any Yorkshire man who
knows the families of that Country, cannot distinguish betwixt the Swerd of
King Charles, and the Sword of an Howard, Dunbarre, Evers, Falconverg
Gascoigne, Sayer, Bulmer, Vavasor, Mydulton, Menie^l Errington To^stall
VVilham, Salvi^, Fairfax of Gillings, Gailes, Thuaites, Craythorne, and many
more families of that Country who are notorious, Hispaniolized and Iesuited
Papists, and all up in this business, the yongue men with their Swords, middle
men with their Counsels and Committees, and the aged with their orizons well;
non arabis cum bove et a sino it is an unworthy Conjunction to join the King
and these men together, and I hope these men's swords shall never fit the Kings
Scab^rd, but they deal just as Greg. Nazioanzen in his first Oration against
Julian says the Pagan Emperors did, who stamped together upon the same coins
the Image of Caesar and of the Pagan Gods, that if the Christians would not
adore those Idols, they might be guilty also of not doing homage to the
Emperor, and so suffer both death and confiscation, so these conjoyne still
the King and his Soldiers, that who so disrespects and disobeyes such fellows
as Duncombe, or Duke Holtby, men infamous and stigmatived in their very
moralls, must be said to reflect upon the King himself? but do I not know
rancide and futile this argument i^? did I not see what a strong and chief
influence the Papists had on the Army and Country? how all painful and honest
Ministers? were banished, were they never so moderate and cautious in their
expressions, or retired in their aboades, only because they would not rant and
curvet in pulpits for their cause? did I not see and tell some of the Committee
in York that they could not but take notice what a persecution was upon
Religion under pretense of being for the King? did not the Earl of Newcastle
in his Proclamations and edicts give the Papists that soft and oily term of
those of the Romish Communion? and after did he no: (weakly and sillily enough
God-wot, unless he would have had all the world to have known our
synaiocrateia) insert in his commands, that he did command this and that with
the advice and consent of the Queen? and though the old Papists were more
cautious in their words at first, did not such of them as we^e impetuous and
forward, by reason of drinck, or passion, or youth, declare plainly it was not
for the King they drew their Sword^, but for the Queen, and for their own
Religion, and preservation: did not young Sayre (a family of 1700 l. Per annum,
and yet must have from the Earl of Newcastle a grant of Sir Matthew Bointons
rents, and others to) say, that he hoped by such a day, there should not be a
Round head in Yorke-shire, I mean, quoth he, not a Protestant, but I contain.

Thus have I a little hunted as a Flea, and a Partridge, this unreasonable, and
dangerous Oath, composed as I verily think, not only for and in behalf of the
Papists, but by them, or their Priests, and Jesuits, or at least, as they say,
Mahomet had his Alcoran made up by a Jew, and a Nestorian Monk, to cull out of
both religions, what might please most. So I doubt (I will not affirm it, for
that were to undervalue my self to assert what I am not certain of) that not
only some Popish Priests, but perhaps Doctor Balcanquall, Bish. Bramhall,
Doctor Couzins, Master Triplit, Master Neale, and such have too much
countenanced this Oath.

My advice in a word to my Country men is, that those that have not taken it,
will trust God for protection, and not build up matter thereby, for they know
not how much sorrow afterward, if they belong to God, and those that through
ignorance or frailty have, they would remember that good and safe rule, In
malis promissis rescinde fidem in turpi voto muta decretum, and conclude as the
Bish. of Winchester (Andrews) did in the Star Chamber, in the case of the
Count^sse of Shrewsburie, who would not speak in a cause, wherein she should
have given testimony, because she had vowed to be silent. I assure your
Ladyship, Madam, quoth he, you may not only break your vow, but vow never to
make one so rash and foolish again.

Printed according to Order.


