THE LADIES, A SECOND TIME, ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.

A Continuation of the Parliament of LADIES.

Their Votes, Orders, and Declarations.

Die Martis August 2. 1647.
Ordered by the Ladies assembled in Parliament, that these their Votes, Orders,
and Declarations, be forthwith Printed and Published.

T. Temple Cler. Mrs Martha Peele Messenger.




Printed in the Year 1647.

The Parliament of Ladies.
Secunda Pars
THE Ladies well affected, whom in my first, I told you were Assembled at
Spring Garden, and upon emergent occasion, had adjourned their House, for that
while they were employed about the ^ff^yres of the publ^cke, their Lords had
a(...) to hunt forbi^den G^me; and ta^^^ (...)ure consideration, that it is a
su^e axiom, (...) begins at home, they held it convenient, to ad(...) for a
certain time; and h^ving reduced their L(...) to a privation to assemble (...)
meet in Parliament a^ b^fo^e: for that Ph^losophicall Lady, the Lady May had
s^yd, that the acts of Governors, cannot p^ssibly have any strong influence
upon the public, so long as things were not punctually p^rformed at home; but
no sooner had the Ladies effected their wishes, and having by their earnest
allurements, constrained their Lords to hunt the game more often then they were
willing to do, especially in their own ( --) berries, so sufficiently abated
their affections to that sport, that they began to be altogether weary and
tired, vowing for the future, that to hunt their own game, was enough and
more, then the state of their bodies required; the Ladies with a great deal of
jucundity and contentment, assembled themselves together again.

In the first place they took into consideration, the sale of the Bishops
Lands, and upon the Question resolved:

That the Bishopric of Lincoln, of Worcester, of Ely, and Durham, should
remayn entire; for that though the Bishops of those Sees, had in other matters
of concernment, showed themselves very averse, yet to the Ladies assembled,
they had been very free and cordial, even to their utmost abilities, and had
in some private performances, aided them more strongly then any secular man
whatsoever. That the Lady Denbigh should have power to instate the Bishop of
Lincoln in his See, the Lady Middlesex the Bishop of Ely the Lady Scot the
Bishop of Durham, the Lady Stanford the Bishop of Worcester, each of these
L^d^es to have power respectively, to settle the said Bishops in their first
and full power; and in c^se of resistance, to arm the well affected of the
Country against those that shall make opposition: but with this proviso, that
for the future, the said Ladies shall not ingrosse to themselves, all the
performances of these Clergy men as before, but that their abilities shall be
esteemed for the use of the whole House in general.

Resolved upon the Question.
That the Lands and Revenews belonging to the Sees of Canterbury and York be
sold, to a molehill, for that the Bishops of those Diocesses, have from the
beginning, been observed to be nothing well affected to the desires of the
House; and that no notable thing is recorded that they have ever done
demonstratively, showing their willingness and ability, but that they ever
gathered money, and but seldom coverd ( --).

That the Lady Oxford, the Lady May; and the Lady Tufton, be appointed and
furnished with power to accomplish the Order of the house; and the rather, for
that the extreme hate the said Ladies bear to those men, of what rank
soever, that were not willing, to their utmost abilities, to accomplish the
will of the House, would be a sufficient instigation to incite them to proceed
with vigor.

While these things were in agitation, in comes a Messenger from the House of
Commons, desiring their Ladish^ps concurrence with an Order to be issued out by
the authority of both Houses, viz. that all Malignant Ministers should be
prohibited from entering into pulpets, for that many of them, contrary to a
former express Order, preached each Sabbath day, both in City and Country,
divulging doctrine of very dangerous consequence, and scandalous to the Houses;
their Ladyships hereupon, fell into debate, and had much controverting about
the word En^er, the Lady Barrington affirming, that the Commons by this, made
an absolute intrenchment on their privileges: for though to the Commons it
would cause no detriment, yet to them the abridgement of Entrance, might
occasion much sorrow and vexation, being one of their chief immunities; they
therefore returned Answer, that they could not pass it, for that to diverse of
the Malignant Ministers, viz. Dr. Griffin, Mr. ^ieve, Mr. Cady, cum multis
aliis, they were infinitely engaged, as to men that had entered their pulpits to
their exceeding comforts, when as they were altogether destitute of
consolation; the one at Abington, the other at Maidstone, the other at Stoke,
upon which the business was waved, and proceeded no farther.

The House then appointed Committees, viz. the Lady Newport, the Lady
Buckingham, and the Lady Carlisle, to see to the compounding of Delinquents for
their estates; the Lady Carlisle, notwithstanding her age, and ugliness, would
not come to composition with Arundell, for his Delinquency in deserting and
complying with the Lady Tuften: Captain Edwards was also brought in for a
Delinquent; but he ap^log^zed for himself, that he would not have forsaken the
service of the State, and in particular of the Lady Newport, but that he
observed that her ( --) was like a well, always exhausted with two buckets,
for that he was no sooner out but Waller was in, and therefore he was the more
to be excused, for that he left not the said Lady altogether destitute of a --
etc.

This day a Petition came from the Lady Waller, desiring that she might be
restored again to her place in the House, pro^esting that she was well
affected, though her Knight were fled away with Maynard, and Massey; but it was
alleged against her, that she was utterly ^ncapable of sitting in Parliament,
for that while her Knight with Glin, and Stapleton, were endeavoring a new
war, she also was found in arms under Col. Pointz; but upon her importunity,
the business was put off for another days hearing.

The House then took into consideration the impious act of the Lady Powland,
who changing the English, for French air, had entered into a Monastery, and was
become a Nun: the House considering the great prejudice that this her example
might produce, voted her guilty of high Tre^son, and that whenever she
should be taken, she should suffer as a Traitor; and to prevent the like
danger, for the future, made this ensuing Order, and then adjourned for that
day.

Die Veneris, August 6. 1647.
The Ladies Assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration the late Act of
the Lady Powland, who contrary to the Law of nature, and sense of the house,
has forsaken the society of men, to be a recluse, o^ c^oistered Nun, and not
without grief beholding the effects, which such an example may occasion, do
order, and decree, that the said Lady Powland for her fact so committed, shall
suffer death without mercy, if she ever be taken: and for the future, they
ordain that none shall be so hardy as to attempt the like, under pain of
forfeiting life and estate; but shall to their u^most abilities strive to
increase and multiply, and for their encouragement therein, it is by these
presents ordained by the Ladies Assembled in Parliament, that the Females of
great Britain shall have free leave, and license in case of their husbands
disability, to use the performances of their eldest servant, and if he fail,
of their near neighbor, and this without scruple or question.

T. Temple Clarke.


The Ladies assembling again the next day, The first business was a report
from the Committee for Delinquents estates, who named in the first place, the
right Honorable, the Lord Mountague, who was impeached for a Delinquent to the
house, and had deserted the Lady Virrian, and had allied himself to the Lady
Kirbe; but the house taking into consideration his former special services to
many of them in general, and in particular to the Lady Bedford, and the Lady
Stamford, the Lady Stamford avouching that he was a man well gifted, and had a
large tallent, and one that had endured many dangerous incounters in the
service of the house, and had been in the Chyrurgions hands, they therefore
ordered that his delinquency should be taken off, and he to have free leave to
be at the service of the Lady Kirbe, etc.

It was moved then, by the learned Lady, the Lady May, that the day of
humiliation might be appointed to implore a blessing on the endeavors of men,
and that they might be enabled to go through stitch with their undertakings,
and become every day more and more active, which was passed, and a Messenger
sent to the Commons for their concurrence.

Their Ladyships then received word that a Messenger waited at the door, sent
from the house of Commons, to wit, Mr. Howard, and Mrs. Glescoth, who being
admitted in, delivered their bill, which was to desire their concurrence to a
Petition with Propositions to be sent to his Majesty for a safe and well
grounded peace, which their Ladyships passed, and ordered the Lady Thin and
the Lady May, to join with two of the House of Commons, and they jointly to be
urgent upon his Majesty to sign the Propositions, and so for that day
adjourned their house.

The next day the house being met, a Petition was delivered, entitled the
humble Petition of many thousands of Citizens Wives, in and about the City of
London, the substance of which was, that whereas diverse weak persons were
crept into places, beyond their ability, and had undertaken that which the
Petitioners found by common experience, they were not able to perform, they
therefore desired that men of abler parts, and greater abilities, might be put
in their rooms; which would be to the Petitioners infinite advantage, the
house having heard their Petition, ordered hearty thanks to be given them, for
their good affections to the State, and that the Lady Devonshire, the Lady
Middlesex, and the Lady Bullinbrooke, should be a Committee appointed to
consider of this business.

It was then moved by the Lady Norton, that a day of thanksgiving might be
appointed for the Armies happy entrance into the City without tumult, for the
exceeding great endeavors of the Commanders of the Army to pleasure the house,
thanks returned to Sir Thomas Fairefax for his many able performances in the
service of the Lady Denbigh, to Cromwell for his valiant charging performed in
the service of the Lady Newport, which Order being sent to the Commons for
their concurrence, they sent it back with their assent and additions; that
thanks also should be given, that they had so fairly drawn their necks out
of the collar, and had laid the weight of their own crimes, upon the backs of
Waller, Massey, and Pointz, leaving those less interressed in the impeachment
then themselves in the lurch; Mr. Craddock desired to preach in the forenoone*
but the Sermon to be in English, and not in Welsh, and notice to be given him
that he should have care not to blurt out the language of the
Cambro-Brittanians, instead of the Romans, as he did once at St. Michaels
Cornehill; Mr. Case to be in the afternoon, and that he be desired to pray
with his eyes open, and not to offer up his orisons blindly, that is to say,
with hipocriticall confidence, and that Mrs. Cook be prohibited from
accompanying him three days before, lest he suffer some diminution of memory.

Word was brought in that Mr. Peter's stood at the door, and had a message of
import to relate to the house, who immediately commanded him to be brought in;
who after obeisance told them, that he gave thanks to God, who had appointed
him to be the happy Messenger of blisfull news, to wit, that Digby was again
reconciled to the Lady Tuften, and once more doted upon this painted face,
which news because it highly pleased the house; they ordered Mr. Peter's twenty
pounds for a gratuity, and that he should prepare himself to preach before
them the next Fast day; for that they intended then to be very merry.

A Paper was drawn up, and sent to the Synod, by especial order from the
House, desiring them to give a speedy answer to the satisfaction of the house,
to these following questions.

F^rst, what is meant by that place where it is said, and Iud^h went in unto
her, and lay with her, and why there is such a Tautology?

Secondly, by what means came it to pass that Lot was able to perform the
act of generation with his two Daughters, and to ply his business so notably,
as to get them with child, and yet not know when they lay down, nor when they
rose up?

The Messenger bearing this Order to the Assembly, they returned answer, that
they would give a solution to these Queries with all convenient speed.

A complaint was brought in against one Paul Best, who had broached many
damnable, and heretical Doctrines, amongst the rest one was, that women were
incapable of eternity, as wanting that immortal substance, which was injected
into Adam, to wit the soul; and his reason was, for that he read that God
breathed into Adam, and he became a living soul; but woman was made of man,
participating only of his earthly substance, no mention of any soul infused
into her; for he said woman was ordained only for the earth, but man only for
heaven, and this he said was the reason that women were so sensual of such
ravenous, and infatiate appetites, being like other creatures only of the
earth, earthly: the house having heard the contents of the complaint, became
greatly enraged, and ordered that the books or pamphlets, which the said Paul
Best had compiled, and divulged, maintaining this error, should be gathered
together, and openly burnt by the common hangman, himself to be kept close
Prisoner till further order, and in the mean time a Declaration to be set
forth evidently proving that women have souls; the chief argument to be this,
that seeing the Devil is a spirit without a body, and yet is c^p^ble of
eternity; so women being bodies without souls, may also be capable of eternity.

Then the Ladies took into consideration the great decay of Males, occasioned
by the late unnatural war, and therefore ordered.

Die Mercur. August 13. 1647.
It is by these presents Ordered and Decreed, by the Ladies assembled in
Parliament, That forasmuch, as by the late unnatural War, many men of great
abilities and able performances, were cut off, not only to the prejudice of
this House, but of the whole Kingdom, as by several Petitions from many
thousands of unsupplied Women, may appear: Be it therefore Ordered and
Ordained, for the more speedy replenishing of the Kingdom, that it shall be
lawful, for the time to come, for any Woman Venereously inclined, and capable
of more then is put upon her, to use the aid and assistance, not only of the
men of her own Nation, but also of any other Forraigner, whether Frnchman,
Spaniard, or German, to the end there may be aspeedy supply of Males for those
were lately massacred, and the Kingdom furnished with able and active men,

T. Temple Cler. Parl.


The H^use then adjourned for that day, and on the morrow assembled again,
where the first thing they ^ell upon, was, a Complaint the was made against
Players, who contrary to an Ordinance, had se^ up shop again, and ^cted diverse
P^ayes, at the two hous^s, the Fortune, and Salisbury Court. Whereupon it was
demanded what Plays they were, and answer being given, that one of them was
the scornful Lady, the house took it in high disdain, and as an absolute
contemp of their power; and therefore ordered that Alderman Atkins should make
a journey on purpose to suppress them; and also ordered that an Act should be
passed to prohibit that Play to be herafter acted; but diverse Ladies were
offended at this Order, intended for the supp^essing of Plays, as the Lady
Munmouth who liked Sir John Suck^ins play so well, that she p^wned her Jewels
to maintain his back: and the Lady Stanford, Frank Beaumonts Play so well,
setting his Scornful Lady aside, she would often admit him in, when her Lord
was kept at staves end: a great confusion happening about this business of
Plays, they at length concluded, that a Committee of Ladies should be chosen
on purpose to consider of this business.

Their Ladyships then taking into considerations, the many pressing affairs
which they were like to lie under, Ordered, that Dr. Strickland, and Dr.
Burges, (a man furnished with a large talent) and Doctor Chamber lain, should
be Assistants to the House, that so the Ladies might receive such comfortable
distillations, as those worthy men were able to afford them.

In the last place, the Ladies being to adjourne, for some Months, sent to the
Assembly of Divines, to know whether they had according to their desires, wrote
any thing tending to the solution of the Questions by them propounded; but
Answer being returned, that the Assembly of Divines were now in deep
Consultation, to prove that the two lewd Elders, who tempted Susanna to
wickedness, might have a Dispensation from the National Assembly; the Ladies
were content to be resolved at their leisure: and having Ordered these their
proceedings to be Printed and Published, adjourned their House.

The End.

