THE TREATY AND ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN The Estates of Holland, the
Prince of Orange, and Magistrates of AMSTERDAM.

WITH An exact Narrative of the chief Passages and Proceedings at the besieging
of the said Town by the Prince of Orange; the manner of raising their
Batteries, and 300 Piece of Ordnance mounted against the Prince's Army.

ALSO The discovery of a great Plot and Design a-against the Towns of Delph.
Dort, Medembleck, Harlen and Hoarn. With the Prince's seizing on several Lords
of Holland, and commiting them prisoners to Lovestein Castle.

London, Printed by J. Clowes, over against the lewer-Pump in Grub-street. 1650.

A LETTER FROM ROTTERDAM.
SIR,
THe news we have at present here, I shall impart to you. (as far as time will
give leave.) About 2 or 3 months since, the Estates of Holland had some
difference with the Prince of Orange, about cas^^ering or disbanding of forces,
they desiring that they might ease the people of their taxes, as the ot^^r
Provinces have (they alone paying about 60 g. per cent. whenas all the other 6
Provinces pay but the remaining 40 between them all) they complained much of
their Officers, that they abused them by false Mustering their Soldiers; for
if they were allowed 60 in a Company, they would not keep above 30. and the
reason was (the Capt. say) for want of current payment, being forct to make use
of men called Soliciteurs to furnish them with Money, who deduct above 20 or 25
Per. cent. for their disbursment. Now the Estates of Holland indeed, did not so
much desire to disband any Soldiers; but that the Companies being so small,
they might disband some Officers, and keep up all the Soldiers, and by
cashiering of those Soliciteurs, and by managing the business well in paying
the Soldiers currently themselves, they would save 100000 pound Per Annum. The
major Vote in the States General was, to side with the Prince, the one having a
Brother a Soliciteur, a Cosen perhaps a Col. another friend a Capt. etc. and
they petitioning them and the P. of Orange continually to be kept up, and not
disbanded: resolved they would live and die with each other, (now you must take
notice that all the States General did not give their Votes to this, but the
Major part; for 2 or 3 Provinces have since protested against their
proceedings) and then the English Cavelierish Col. and Capt. under his Command,
with those of the States General, (that had voted they should not be disbanded)
tickled him in the ear with many strange things that they would do for him, and
to curb Holland by the sword, and to make him a Sovereign of these Countries,
and certainly to effect this, he wanted none of Charles Stuarts Council, nor of
his mother Mall neither, for the English Malignants here did report tha^ their
design was a month since just as hereafter related. On the 20. June or there
abouts, the Prince with his Colonels Capt. and other Officers, most English
Malignants, with some Commissioners of the Estates General, went about to all
the towns in Holland, where the Prince was nobly entertained as their Genesis but
at Amsterdam, Delph, Dort, Medemcleck, Harlen and Hoarne, they would not give
them audience in their public Common-Councels, (in their Towns) not
acknowledging the Commissions they came withal, so they gave them no content;
the Prince with the rest returned again to the Hague, where they were all as it
were mad that they could not obtain their ends; remaining there, they studied
day and night of a way how to obtain that by force, which (as they thought)
could not be had with Love: So on Saturday last (being the 30. alias 20. July)
the P. of Orange seized on 6 Lords of Holland as they were in full Council,
viz. one of Dort, one of Delph, two of Harlen, one of Horn, two of Medembleck
and those two of Amsterdam escaped; they were the next day all carried to a
Castle near Gorcom called Lovestein, being chiefly for a prison, were none but
traitors are put in. That same day viz. the 30. alias 20. July, the Prince gave
Commission for his Army to march out of Garrison to Amsterdam; where on Saturday
last in the morning, appeared 2000 horse and 1000 foot; but being discovered by
the Hamborough Post, the Lords of the Town were acquainted therewith, and
command was given, the Gates should be shut, and the Magazine being opened,
about 300 pieces of Ordnance, was by the boys and laborers in the streets
dragged up to the walls and Sconces, and Drums beat for the trained bands to be
presently in Arms, which was effected: as also the Soldiery that belongs to
the Town, being about 5 or 600 were also in Arms, and kept strict watch both at
gates and walls, the same day a Company of their Soldiers with Carpenters went
out, and cut down all draw Bridges, and got men of war in great number, to lie
from Texel to the River Tie, for fear of forces to come in by Sea (as was
reported) from Zealand, the mean time drums beat for to list Soldiers in the
Town, and gave 15 stivers a day, and in 2 days time had above 12000 Soldiers
in pay, on the Lords day they in the Town set open their sluices, and drowned
all the land round about, so that the Princes soldiery was forced to keep on
the bank-sides, which were high; the mean time most part of all his Army came
down thither both horse and Foot, and laid siege to it; and in 2 or 3 places
began to make works against it. Take notice that till the Lords day noone he
himself remained in the Hague, and knew no otherwise but his men were got into
Amsterdam: but when he heard the contrary, he was mad and ready to tare his
hair off his head, and seeing himself thus deprived of his hopes in the design,
he (like a Lion robbed of her whelps) did so take on, and immediately in person
went to the leaguer; where in a rage, as before mentioned, he began to raise
works, but to no purpose. The mean time, this town of Rotterdam stood nutral,
and we expected every hour that some of his Soldiers would come and quarter
upon us, but did not, and Dort, Delph, Leyden, Harlen and other Towns shut
their Gates, and were in Arms. On Monday and Tuesday the Estates of Holland
(consisting of one or two men out of each Town) met, and resolved to send for
him home, and the States Genesis seeing his design broke, they most of them fell
off from him, and both sent a Committee to him to Treat, and those also of
Amsterdam sent to him, and on Wednesday last they were agreed as follows.

That the Army shall again march to their quarters, and the town shall not be
molested; but that trading may be free, and those that were the causers of this
trouble, shall give an account for it afterward; which shall be disputed at the
next meeting at the HAGUE.

It is my opinion, that though the business is appeased for the present; yet
some heads will fly for it, and the P. himself, if his head remains on his
shoulders, it will be well: however they all say, they will take a great part
of his power from him. Certainly if he had taken AMSTERDAM, he would have made
himself Sovereign of these Countries, to have made slaves of these people of
Holland; His intentions were to have seized upon the Banck there, and the stock
of the town, which is many millions. The people in general hate this odious
design of his, and as well Magistrates as people say plainly, they may thank
his brother Charles for this, and had he obtained his desire, he had most
assuredly curbed the Estates of Holland for their friendly assistance or
correspondency, and would have bin very able to assist his Brother; but we may
see much of God in this business, and I hope these Countries will make a faster
union with England then ever yet they have done. The English Malignants here,
are sad at this business, for they were in hopes, and were confidently assured
had this design gone on, that their design also would be promoted by it. I have
thus as near as I can, given you the relation of this business; for any other
particulars, I refer you to Amsterdam Letters, Vale.

If the troubles had continued, I had sent my wife and child to London per this
passage now a going, per whom also many families of our English would have
gone, all things being packed up in a readiness; but now we shall wait to see
what God shall farther do with us. Some of your Company removed their cloth to
Zealand, for it was not here without danger; For a great many Companies of
Soldiers were quartered at the Hague and we did expect them or others here,
and the Malignants would have been favored, but the better party burdened.

The Lord of Dort that was taken prisoner (by name De Wit) is dead, its
thought poisoned.

FINIS.

