REASONS WHY THE Supreme Authority OF THE THREE NATIONS (For the time) Is not
in the PARLIAMENT, BUT In the new-established Council of State, CONSISTING OF
His Excellence the Lord General CROMWELL, And his honorable Assessors.

Written in answer to a Letter sent from a Gentleman in Scotland to a friend of
his in London. To which is added the Letter it self.

Printed at London, and are to be sold by Rich. Moon, at the seven Stars in
Paul's Churchyard, near the great North-door. 1653.

The LETTER.
THis late dissolution of the Parliament puts us all here in a maze, and the
most of this Country conceive themselves thereby to be in a worse condition
then ever; both for that the little blossoming hopes, which the People here
(especially the Clergy) were beginning to entertain of some favor from the
Presbyterian party sitting in the House, are now quite blasted and blown away:
as likewise because we apprehend (how justly I cannot tell) that the
unexperiencedness, and illiteracie of military men in the disquisition of
divine or legal concernments, will by all appearance bring us to submit our
necks to the absolute, uncontrollable, and arbitrary yoke of the sword: into
which jealousies we are the more forcibly driven, that we think that act,
whereby a rupture was made into the sacred authority of England, to have been
both rash, unlawful, and strange: and that so much the more, that those
Parliamentary men were accounted the refuge and sanctuary of the People, the
Representatives of the Nation, the brains of that politic body, whereof the
Army is but the hands, and chusers and preferrers of these very men to their
respective places, that were the extruders of them. I pray you Sir let me have
your opinion of this great and sudden change by the next Post, whether you
think the proceeding illegal or no, if conducible or destructive to the good of
Scotland, and how England and Ireland stand affected to the now established
Council.

This Tuesday May 10. 1653. Your most humble servant, C.N.

The ANSWER.
Sir,
SOme other returns from me to former Letters of yours upon subjects of the
nature of that, which came to my hands this Monday the 16 of May, having as
often as they were sent received from you that acceptance, which, by spirits of
your ingenuity, is usually bestowed on men of such unprejudicate opinions, as,
out of my affection to truth (without by-endes of my own) I have oftentimes
very freely laid before you: do now encourage me in answer to your last of the
date of the 10 of May, by which you are pleased to demand my sentiment
concerning the new established authority, after the abrupt dissolution of the
late tridecennial Parliament, to give my pen as much scope, for your
satisfaction, and the undeceiving of those, that possibly are misinformed of
my Lord General, and his honorable Council of Officers, as in the interval
betwixt the time of Mundays coming packet, and that of Tuesdays going one, I
can get snatched from my other too too urgent occasions; Therefore do I expect
of your courtesy, in case no more pressing business deprive me of leisure, that
you would be pleased to pardon the contingence of my excursion beyond the
ordinary limits of an Epistle; the prolixity will undoubtedly prove to you the
less tedious, that you be thereby informed of the lawfulness of the change: of
the Nations of England and Irelands approbation of it: and of Scotlands greater
apparent happiness under it then the former Government; of all being mentioned
in your Letter) I am obliged in answer thereto, to give you the best account I
can.

Here do I intend to propound little or nothing of Necessity, although the most
of the Parliamentary writers make that to be the main reason of turning the
Monarchy of this Land unto a State; and that many others have said that the
preservation of both the Army and Country did totally depend upon this late
resolute action of breaking up the Parliament: it shall suffice me, and I hope
not displease you, that I endeavor to justify the deed by the mildest and
most moderate arguments can be devised, and of a nature averse from aspersing
(but as little as may be) any former Judicatory.

Now if the question be stated, whether the Supreme authority be in the
Parliament, or the Army; and that for the establishment thereof both power and
lawfulness be necessarily required, I doubt me all reason will carry it for the
Army. Here would I entreat such as are of another opinion, to make appear what
it is they mean by the word Parliament, whether it be that kind of convention
which the army did allow to sit at Westminster. or the preceding one, consisting of
King, Lords, and Commons, which (as the soul of man is said to comprehend the
rational, sensitive, and vegetative faculties) was first constituted triennial,
and afterward by virtue of the same Royal source, from whence the former grant
did flow, prolonged or perpetuated at the pleasure and discretion of the
sitters: I believe that those who having declared against Monarchy do cordially
decline it, will rather admit of the former acception of the word; though
perhaps it be said, that the army derived its power from the Parliament, and
not the Parliament from it; for I may say that the Lords and Commons chose the
Army; which Army (when the Lords and many of the Commons had, by pressing too
hard upon the Liberty of the subject, forfeited their places) took into their
protection that part of the House which voted down Monarchy, and was called the
Representatives of England; by which means I take it to be clear enough, that
the Supremacy is in the Army, till they be pleased to resign it in the fovour
of new Representatives; for Parliaments were never hithereto called but by
Kings or Queens of a regal power, and that to parley with them, and advise them
in difficult matters, so that the very word thereof seems to savor of
malignancy, and probably ought to have been altered, as the term of the lower
House was turned to that of the House of Commons. Nevertheless passing by mere
words, there being nothing more certain then that the thing signified by the
word Parliament was nothing else but the Kings great Council, there being no
more King, such a Counsel by infallible consequence is a non-entitie; and
therefore Monarchy being extinct, the government of the Nation is inherent for
the time in the persons of my Lord General, and his Council of Officers.

Let not the Nation or any one therein startle at this, for as it is just where
the power of Protection is, that there should be the Authority (all of us owing
obedience to those that do protect us) so is it no new thing that so legal a
right be practically exerced: is it not plainly set down in the Judges, how
Ehud, after having killed King Eglon, ruled all Israel for the space of many
years? did not the Empire of Rome enlarge it self farther under the command of
the Soldiery then the Senate; and the Roman Commonwealth flourish more under
Julius Caesar and Augustus, then ever it did either before or after their
times? and yet I may very warrantably avouch, that the present Lord General of
England was never so much subordinate to this State, as both of them were to
that of Rome.

(...) we look into the state of Nature, which is that where(...) M^^archies
and States are posited, both in relation to one another, and in the manner of
their own establishment, we shall very evidently perceive, that in whose person
or persons the power is devolved, there rests the Sovereignty. Nor is it mere
strength that brings one or many to this power, it being requisite that
wisdom and other concurring qualifications contribute to so great a work: the
Fox is wiser then the Lion, yet is the Lion king of brutes; not but that there
are beasts stronger then he, (as is the Elephant) but that there is none in
which strength, wit, agility, and generosity together are better commixed. My
Lord General and the Officers of his Army are truly such: has any people or
nation outwitted them in their Treaties? has any been more expedite in the
active part? more valiant in the field, more patient in hardships, or more
noble and merciful then they after an obtained victory? Did all these
endowments ever meet together in a Parliament, or concentre in a promiscuous
unmilitary Body of Country-Gentlemen and Lawyers? It was the Army, I believe,
and not the Parliament, by whose wit and valor Ireland was reduced, Scotland
pacified, and England established.

What though they be Swordmen, should that derogate from their Authority? I
say, No; for that God, who is Goodness in the abstract, and Wisdom it self,
although he be called neither God nor Lord of Learning or Law, is no more
entitled the God of Peace then he is the Lord of Hosts; the later title, by
all appearance (if I may say so) being the more honorable, in that we worship
God because he is powerful, and love him for his goodness.

Furthermore, there is hardly any Argument that the Lord brings in the
Scripture for his being the God of Israel, that is not deduced from his power,
as the drowning of Pharaoh's Army in the Red sea, the destroying of the
Canaanites, the laying of the foundations of the earth, and setting of bounds
to the Sea: nor were the new Israelites, who are the Christians, otherwise
convinced of the Divinity of Christ, then by Miracles, which were the
extraordinary effects of his power.

Thus do I conceive that the sole power of the Land is in my Lord General and
the Army, and that no State can be well governed, where Authority is divorced
from Power; for without Power, Authority is but as a naked Virgin exposed to
the raging lust of a Satyr; nor where these two are separated from each other,
can the Good be rewarded, or the Wicked corrected; because a State, how
peremptory and commanding soever it be in issuing out of Orders, will never be
able without a considerable power to confer recompenses and inflict
punishments. And if you think, that by such means we lie at the mercy of the
Sword, being under the command of Military Officers; I must needs ask you, If
you would rather be under Masters that have no Swords, and so be exposed to the
devouring sword of Forraigners?

The Safety of the People is said to be the Supreme Law, yet are those that
have the power in their hands the fittest Judges of that safety; because they
are the best able to consider what and where the strength is which is the Guard
of the Nation: nor is there any reason why we should be diffident of the
discretion of those Officers, who are men of Public spirits, and such as have
not sought themselves; and therefore deserve to be accounted our Masters, by
defending us from the violence of others, and preserving us in those Rights
that belong unto us.

We were made subject to this late Parliament (if we may so call it) by the
mere virtue of that power wherewith the Army did protect it: and thus, by
saving of our lives and goods, they have justly gained more dominion over us,
then others can claim right unto. And seeing Egypt for several Ages together
was well governed by the Soldier- Mamaluks, who were not a freeborn people,
Should this Island grudge to be ruled by the freest spirited men in the world,
and that under the conduct of my Lord General Cromwell, which title of General
(for his sake) ought to be reputed no less honorable amongst us, then that of
Imperator was amongst the Romans. And to mount yet a little higher, I must
needs think, that the Lord of Hosts, who is not ashamed to take the name of
Generalissimo upon him, would not have us to be so inconsiderate, as to
disrespect the Government of a General; especially for that being commanded to
be like our Father that is in heaven, that Government of all other is without
doubt most rational, which draws nearest to the model of His. God is our
General, and did not only hazard his life for our good, but died for us in the
person of his Son. Let the Cherubims and Seraphins take the title of Parliament
upon them, if they will, yet still is the Lord of hosts above them. For my own
part, I would prefer the Sword of Gideon to the Rod of Aaron, and the Laurel to
the Long Robe. Is not the High-Constable of France above the Chancellor, and a
Knight in the Field before a Doctor in the Law? So should the General of our
Army be above any Member in the Commonwealth, and the Officers he adjoyneth to
him partake of his pre-eminence.

Whereas you say, that those Military men are not like to be such Politicians,
in foreseeing the dangers may befall the Country, as the Members of Parliament;
I answer, If that Policy consist in preserving us from the Invasion of
strangers, and discovery of Plots amongst our selves at home, That no men can
be thought fitter then those that are in hazard daily, by the prevention or
withstanding of those inconveniences. Do not Apprentiships make Tradesmen so
perfect in their Callings, that the most ingenious Scholar, how pregnant soever
he be in setting down the mysteries of a Trade, cannot be so exquisite in his
skill therein, as he that has served to it any considerable time. The
application is easy. And what although (as you say) they were no Lawyers, so
they be just; nor Divines, if pious? Yet let us not imagine they are the less
these, because they are good Soldiers: should we think Armies want Reason,
because they have Strength? I, on the contrary, think that the knowing of their
strength adds to their Reason. Why may not a woman be fair, though she be
chaste? yea truly I think her Chastity makes her the fairer: if plurality of
good qualities were not compatible in one person, the concatenation of Virtues
would not be a so generally received opinion amongst the Wise: as Lawyers
sometimes are esteemed bold, even when they do but speak; so may Soldiers be
called prudent, whilst they are in fighting.

A well-grounded power nevertheless is that which gives the essential being to
Authority, and the Sword that which infallibly governs every where both in
Monarchies and States. Is not the Man accounted the Head in Matrimony, because
of his being more powerful and vigorous then the woman? Genoa chose Spain for
her Protector, because of his Power; and Geneva the French King, not for his
great Wit, as I conceive it: therefore is it that we should have a more
intrinsecal relation to our immediate Governors, and more intime application
of our Obedience to their Commands.

This I say not to justify every Conquest, although the Scriptures ordain us
to be pliable to all superior powers, because power is from God; of which
passage I refer the interpretation to Divines, and in the interim aver the
unlawfulness of the Turks Authority, albeit it be seconded with sufficient
Power; because the Question is not so much of Power alone, as of Power with
Goodness, and the concomitancie of Moral Virtues; whereof there is such store
in my Lord General and his Officers, that in the Legend of all the Worthies
have not been read more glorious achievements with less ostentation, nor more
self-denial in such actions as in former Ages have been honored with the
sublimest triumphs.

I, but (say you) the Parliament chose the General. What then? Although I have
already proved the contrary; Is not the King of Poland above the People that
elected him? And besides, it is not the Parliament which by his Officers was
dissolved, that made him General; the Army had purged it, and new-molded it
several times before; and, which is more, if this late Parliamentary Authority
was derived from the people, and that the Peoples safety, which is called the
Supreme Law, consist in the welfare of the Army, Is not the Army by that means
protector of both, and the Officers thereof the fittest Legislators when any
danger is imminent? It is then upon that necessity (as many conceive it) of the
preservation of the Peoples safety, which was thought to be in very great
hazard, by the too-long sitting at the Helm of men of private spirits, minding
only their own businesses, that my Lord General and his Officers did reassume
that power which properly was theirs. Or rather, to express it more warily, as
the Lord of hosts stirred up the Parliament to new-model the Army, for the
better furtherance of the War: so has the God of peace moved the Army, by way
of retaliation, to new-model the Government, for the greater tranquillity of
the People.

Had it not been for the Army, the last Treaty (I believe) with the late King
in the Isle of Wight, had, by establis^ (...) him in his throne, hindered the
erection of this Commonwealth; as being perhaps sensible, that the stream of a
Parliament can have no longer infl^ence with any show of right over the people,
after the drying up of the Regal source from whence it sprang at first. It is
that Army then, which by expulsing the old government, is become the true basis
of the new one, and by destroying Monarchy has set up that fabric of a State,
the managing whereof lies upon their shoulders. Who burns the wood engenders
the flame, which domineers over all the combustible stuff it can lay hold on:
whilst the Parliament sat, it was the Army did animate them, the Army was
their soul, and the Master-wheel by which they moved, in which sense I think my
Lord General did acknowledge the Parliaments soveraginty, and in so doing did
derogate nothing from himself and the Officers, who virtually governed by them,
and thus in my opinion are to be interpreted all addresses of mentioning the
Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, of which authority the Officers of the Army were the very Soul, and
they but the outward Organs Microtosmically Representative of the great body of
the Republic.

In your letter you attribute the brains to the Parliament, and to the Army
nothing but hands; but I say it is more like the brains were in the Officers,
or at least more brains, allowing still the hands and feet to the Common
Soldiery: it is not the brains of the Parliament, that have a proper influence
upon the body of an Army, for the brains readily admit not of so great a
separation and distance from the hands; resolution and prudence should be still
coupled together, else the body politic cannot long escape from ruin:
timorousness in counsel makes men forbear the doing of good, and too much
temerity in the practical part prompteth hot spirits to the committing of
wickedness, but together joined, they make a most excellent temper; for from
uniting the vehement heat of the one, to the extreme coldness of the other,
there resulteth a remisser quality in its mediocrity comfortable; this
affording certainty in direction, and that a celerity in performance of what is
good.

Whereas there is a buzzing, that the only refuge of the People was in former
times the Parliament: so may I say that the people of Israel in their stinging
afflictions had the like recourse to the Brazen Serpent, which nevertheless was
afterward very lawfully taken down: we ought not to be such nominal Statesmen
as to dote upon the words of Parliament, Law, Privileges, or I cannot tell
what, whilst all the things signified by them are violated and infringed even
by those that idolize them in outward professions: this is but like the doing
of mischief in nomine domini, and wrapping a Wolf in a Lambs skin. What is the
matter of words, or how the Supreme Authority be called, provided the country
be well governed? Would not any countryman that is hungry, be better pleased,
to have a loas of bread presented to him, although you call it a stone, then a
stone to break his fast upon, which you shall call a loaf? What else is a
Parliament, a sacred assembly, the representatives of all the people? unless
their proceedings be accordingly very conscionable, and just, they are
assuredly but words of no greater veneration then of old were Tyranny,
Kingship, and Priesthood, which in Greece, Rome, and England, where they were
most honored, became afterward odious: after the same manner, though this
late Parliament was called the peoples Representative, and that the whole
Nation did own them for such, yet do the people in general seem to be very well
pleased with their dissolution, and not only they, but the soundest part also
of themselves, as is perceivable by the facility wherewith so great an action
was performed; it being done without any noise, struggle, or yet discontent but
of very few.

But how comes that (say you) to be just now, which formerly in the late Kings
coming to the House, but to require the number only of five members, was
accounted unjust, and a ground sufficient for making a defensive war? I answer,
The case is quite other; for besides that then was a time, wherein formalities
were a great deal more to be regarded, Martial Law, and Military achievements
being things in this Land at that time quite unknown, the late King by his thus
forcible coming in unto the House did break the privileges which both his
predecessors and himself had given, and therefore having resigned his power to
that Parliament, by virtue whereof they then sat legally, he ought, if there
were any refractary members, to have consulted with the remainder of the body
concerning them, who together with the rest of the house had by him that placed
them undoubtedly been raised, had not they been taken into the tuition and
patrociny of the Army, whose Power being from God, he has accordingly
continued unbroken amidst the revolution of various and innumerable dangers, to
the astonishment not only of this Island, but of the whole world besides.

You say the action was violent: I say, No; for it was carried on with the
greatest modesty and discretion that could be imagined. As for that which is
called the rupture of the Parliament, it was as nothing: for if the action in
it self was just (as I affirm it was) officious lingering circumstances, in such
important matters as can admit of no delays, are not to be regarded:
Formalities, at best, in such a juncture of occasions, are but imbellishing
ornaments, or as paintings upon Sepulchers, where there is any tottenness in
the main intendments covered by them. A Cordial in a Pitcher is more estimable
then Poison in an Agat; and a Homely Friend better worth the accosting, then a
Courtly Enemy. He that permits one to wear his Cloak for a while, expecting he
will do it civilly, may afterward require it from him, when he sees him abuse
it. If those of the House be collationed with the Officers of the Army, we
shall find that Parliaments are composed but of Country spirits for the most
part, not much inclined to Milice, and who, though an humor of enriching
themselves should impoverish the Country, will be so much the longer before they
can goodly be made sensible of it, that suchlike men as they being but very
little or seldom acquainted with dangers and losses, are never much nor often
touched with a compassion or fellow-feeling of the sufferings of others: and
any man will acknowledge himself more obliged to him or them that freely hazard
their lives for him, then to such as will but faintly grant his Petition after
a twelvemonths delay perhaps, and expending more in attendance (to speak of
nothing else) then he gets by it.

Admit there be better Lawyers, and greater Scholars amongst those of the
Parliament, then any in the Roll of the Army Officers; yet will it make nothing
for your purpose; for that such skilful men ought rather to be subservient to
the Officers, then thereby to pretend any Mastery over them, is by this
apparent, that Speculation ascends unto Action, wherein consists the life of
all business, and consequently, those Literate men should very humbly and
affectionately submit their studious elucubrations to the resolute disposure of
these other worthy Patriots, who by a Practical industry make the Theory of the
former useful to the furtherance of the benefit of this Commonwealth. Should
not Law be subordinate to Equity; and Learning to Goodness? God has revealed
more to Good men then to Scholars; and we find not anywhere, that either
Divines or Lawyers are men of better lives then others. Take along with you the
tract of all the Prophets and Apostles, and you shall see that they were but
obscure men both in Law and Literature: yea, their very Kings were taken and
selected out of Shepherds, to signify unto us that Law depends not altogether
upon Learning: our Minds are able to judge of Good and Bad, as our Eyes of
Colors, although many times self-interest distracteth the thoughts of these
our minds, and quite diverteth them from the true and right apprehension of
the object; as the Jaundise makes every Color appear yellow to the eye, which
without that imperfection would have discerned aright of any thing exposed to
the sight thereof.

In my opinion, therefore, the Supreme power ought neither to be in Lawyers,
nor Divines, nor both; because those that have been enriched by private
contentions, will never harbor in their breasts such public spirits as shall
suffice to establish domestic safety, and gain stand foreign invasion: for he
is to be accounted the best servant, that does his masters will, and not that
other who says this is my masters will, yet does but his own. Those quaint
expressions, and flourishes of Rhetoric which in gilding a bad cause, being
the effects of depraved Learning, do but cast a thick mist over the eyes of the
hearers understandings, and fill their abused ears with empty sounds of new
Nothings, are not to be expected from the Officers of the Army, who, delivering
their minds ingenuously without either fard or affectation, prosecute good ends
above-boord, by means void of all dissimulation and deceitfulness.

Here will I not utter so much as one syllable either against the whole Body of
the Parliament, or any of its members, in taxing them with unnecessary delays
of granting the subjects just demands, their having intended and accordingly
prosecuted their own affairs more then those of the Public, and suchlike,
whereof there is a great deal already published by others; because I will not
offer to do the Soldiery so much wrong, as to justify their actions by the
indirect way of Recriminating others: I shall remain content with this
comparative expression, in saying, That those who no less freely expose their
persons for the defense of their Country, and maintenance of the Liberties
thereof, into such extreme perils, as if they had the shift of a new life,
wherewith to cloth themselves the next day (life being more precious then
external goods) should be preferred to those that for their own enrichment (if
any such there be) would do the meanest prejudice to the livelihood of another.

The action (say you) is rash, unlawful, and strange. I think it truly more
strange, that any such expression should proceed from a rational man: for as
for the good of the Universe, water sometimes mounteth, and air descends, quite
contrary to the propension of their own natures; so is it that what many times
has been found unlawful in private actions, may in public ones be esteemed
very just. Had Moses stood upon his principles of subjection and obedience to
the Laws of the Prince of his native Country, (which nevertheless the Army was
not so much liable unto in reference to the Parliament) what had become of the
Liberty of the people of Israel, and enlargement of the house of Jacob?
However, although at the first appearance it seem to be an act of Will, yet is
it so far from being unreasonable, that it is the last act and result of the
highest pitch of Reason, and more praiseworthy then that action of the hands,
whereby is brought a wholesome Potion to purge the brain for the safety of the
whole body. If the Reasons have not as yet been made known, it is because of
those worthy Gentlemen's being employed about matters of greater moment; theirs
being the practical, and so fitter for Government, and that of others but
Speculative, which grounded merely upon an aerial discourse of Laws, of aquum,
of bonum, or other suchlike specious things, proving, for the most part, or
rather always, in such spirits as are not bent on action, but common and
general notions, do never produce any considerable thing; which defect is not
to be found in my Lord General, nor the Officers of his Army.

You say they are not so literate as those of the Parliament: I say, For any
thing you know they are; but albeit they were not, it is not much matter, so
they be positively good, and comparatively better then such as are more
learned; which I trust they are: for with so much knowledge as is fitting they
are endowed; and in stead of superfluous additions of Literature, they make a
serious application of the skill they have (wherewith they are qualified in a
competent measure) to the perfect accomplishment of the most commendable
actions. It is not he who makes the best definition of Virtue, that is
therefore the most virtuous man. The best Divines are not the godlyest persons,
nor were there any Lawyers in the Golden age. Subtilty in circumstances,
trivial quirks, and curious researches, in sub-distinguishing of abstracted
flimflam-notions, help very much to cry up men to the title of good Scholars,
in the estimation of frothy Wits.

That we have men powerful, and such as are good, to rule over us, is all we
should desire: and if by misfortune we were necessitated to make election of
one alone of those qualities, it were better (in my opinion) our Governors
were destitute of goodness, then that they lacked power: for good men, without
power, would but leave us to the spoil of every body, whose wickedness they are
not able to suppress, and abandon us as stubble before the fire, to those would
bring us to a sudden and utter desolation: but so they have power, although
otherwise they be bad enough, they will in all probability protect us against
both foreign and domestic Invasions, were it to no other end, but to prey
upon us themselves; which nevertheless they will be loath to do with too great
extremity, because by those means not being able to do it long, they would by
injuring others but weaken themselves, and so at last abstain from it out of
the mere motive of self-love. If Power be thus much to be preferred, when it
goes fingle, which I speak in favor of the Soldiery, Why then should not the
Officers of the Army have their due pre-eminence above any other, seeing
besides the sacred power that is in their hands, they are the greatest paterns
of Piety, and examples of Goodness, that the world affords?

It is absolute and uncontrollable (say you) and therefore dangerous: I answer
you, If an absolute power must rest somewhere in every government (according to
the doctrine of the best politicians) it can (in my opinion) abide in no more
convenient place then its own Sphere. What earthquakes happen, and violent
concussion of things of great weight, even by what (to our seeming) is of far
less moment, when they are debarred the liberty of working about their own
center, as air or fire enclosed when either of them appetes an expansion!

Though other States now adays be not governed so, what then? all States are
not governed after one way, nor Monarchies neither; because the different
inclinations of those that have the power, make what is unjust in one place to
be accounted elsewhere just, and yet possibly there may be latitude enough for
justice in both. Was not the body of the Israelites an Army, led under the
conduct of their General Moses? who albeit he admitted of elders to ease him of
a burden, yet did not any acknowledge the Supreme Authority to lie in them.
Would you in Scotland be like the Jews in their convenanting, and yet disagree
from them in that wherein did consist their greatest honor? There is in
Scotland (as I conceive it) no other kind of native but Cavalier or
Presbyterian; and seeing this latter one thrust out the master of that other,
these others will (in my opinion) be content to be ruled by those that did
protect them against the Malignancy of their competitors: if the other party be
not pleased with it, I must think certainly, that it is upon a ground more
destructive to that country, such as to have the Ministry to overmaster it,
and all the people implicitly tied to have their dark faiths pined on those
men's black sleeves, although most of them, for covetousness, cruelty, and
oppression, be equal to the most corrupt of the laity.

You are afraid that by this change Scotland shall be more in slaved then ever.
I must confess it has not that show of liberty, which it had in the days of
Malcolm Kianmore; but taking it in general (some few persons only excepted that
squeezed the rest) the Egyptian bondage was hardly greater then that which it
endured under Presbytery, whose yoke in that Nation becoming lighter, as the
power of the English increased therein (though not altogether taken off;
because of the supposed prevalency, which some of the Presbyterially-affected
Members of the late dissolved House, had over the counsels of the prime rulers
there) you have now just reason to thank God, that by this change you are like
to be relieved out of the jaws of so wild a monster, and freed from that
Knoxian slavery, which made you miserable within your selves, and despicable
unto all the other Nations of the World. Nor needs any of you to grudge at
his being constrained (when it shall so happen) to submit no longer to the
supreme discipline of the Kirk; seeing the taking of such a coercive course is
to use no more violence, then when one is hindered from prosecuting his own
ruin, and yet (I think) the Commonwealth of England is not able to provide you
with Governors that shall be more tender in laying of burdens upon your
consciences, then my Lord General, and those select Officers of his Army, under
whose command you are, who are all of them haters of contentious divinity, and
the forcing of men's minds to embrace unknown opinions; and who having done so
great matters both in England and Ireland, will be now (I hope) very careful
not to eclipse their reputation by misusing Scotland.

And although there should be found in it some discrepancy in matters of faith
from the upright and true one; yet so long as those opinions break not out into
action, and do only hover about things concerning another world, there is no
doubt but that they will acknowledge, how without the help of man, or any need
of his coacting power, God has a way of his own for the reclaiming of such:
this strain to any judicious man will seem more moderate then that of the
Presbyter, whose ambition it was to have the Scottish Covenant tread underfoot
all the other professions in the world.

Tell me, I pray you, were not all of you (and that not long ago) epidemically
infected with the dease of believing that in the year of the last Iubilee, the
said covenant should be pompously set up in Saint Peter's Church at Rome? nay
further, was there any thing more commonly preached amongst you, then the
cursing of Meroz for not coming out to help the Lord against the mighty? which
text they applied both for and against Monarchy, whilst the enemy remained
still one and the same, so cunning they were in making a nose of wax of the
Scriptures: as likewise the cursing of those that did the work of the Lord
negligently, and withheld their hand from blood. After this manner they stirred
up (you know) the people there to be active in going about the design of
making an universal Kirk, which if they would do, promises were made to them,
of being Gods select and covenanted people, of the driving of the Nations
before them, and their eating the fat and drinking the sweet: all which had
events so suitable to my apprehension, though contrary to their predictions,
that now there is no more common saying, then that your Ministers have been
false Prophets from the beginning, and men of doctrines inconsistent with any
secular government, being so much the more dangerous, that they did always
speak of God, and accounted their cause to be his.

For had they been contented to have said in their Pulpits, Gentlemen, I am to
tell you a story, and a tale truly worthy your hearing, although it might have
been thought a kind of irreligious expression in a place of such reverence; yet
would it have been of less prejudice to the auditory, and impiety in the
speaker, then to have expressed themselves after this fashion, Thus says God,
this is the meaning of his covenant, even when what they spoke was upon
contrivances of their own; for the promoval of by ends destructive to many
duties which God requires of us.

Such as were not Presbyterians, they aspersed with the name of Papist; and
would have continued still so, if Providence had not put the power in the hands
of those, who, though better Protestants then they, do nevertheless acknowledge
the Papal authority to be less tyrannical then theirs, the effects whereof are
so pernicious, that it were better for you in that Country to be left to your
selves, without any Government at all, the mere common laws of Nature, in such a
case of Anarchy, being able to retain you in those duties, which, being drunken
with the dregs of a submission to Hierarchical Sovereignty (whether in one or
many) you would otherwise be enforced to violate.

These, and many other such reasons (which any thing amply to deduce would
require a Treatise apart) do give sufficient evidence against Ecclesiastical
supremacy, whereof we stand in no great need; seeing all divine Laws are
naturally imprinted in the heart of every good man. Covetousness expelled the
Papists from amongst you, Pride overthrew the Bishops, and Lying, with both
these, is like to pull down your Ministers; neither of all which
qualifications, whether jointly or severally, are any way beseeming men of a
Legislative Jurisdiction.

Your Presbyterian Tenets, like Scyrrus and Procrustes beds (to which long men
were equalled by curtaling, and the short by racking out their limbs) will have
all manner of Consciences so adapted to them, as to make the tenderest hearts
shed innocent blood, and bring the proudest Potentates to submit to their
Mas-Johns Delphian Oracle, who possibly pretending to a Prophetical spirit,
leaves almost no place untouched with his entousiastick bolts, but that
wherein is fixed the blank of Truth, which he makes show to level at. Thus,
without considering the various tempers of minds, they would befool all men
alike, and take the same course with the highest spirits, which Numa Pompilius
did with the Commons of Rome, by means of his Nymph Agyria: or Sertorius in
Spain by his white Hind with the inhabitants there, and so possess men with
conceits of their infallibilities in the dispensations of providence, even when
they say no more, but, This will come to pass, for so God has decreed it:
Presbytery must rule, for it is according to the Word; it being more easy to
say any thing, then to give a good reason for it: for, to speak truly, they
never bring any reason but Testimony, and that only grounded upon their own
bare interpretations, flowing from worldly respects, self-interests, and
private designs toward dignity, profit, or pleasure, which for many years
together has run so impetuously in that country, to the stirring up of choler
and indignation in the auditory, against those at whose professions or
inclinations they had any dislike, that, as a clown who has long fasted, will
with a little strong drink be quickly fudled, those incendiary Churchmen do
just so work upon the spirits of such as by a long abstinence from any
nourishing doctrine are with their hot-waters of sedition apt to be inebriated;
there being no more several kinds of strong liquour, then there is variety of
operating upon such addle-brained heads.

There is hardly any judicious man but knows, that it was neither learning,
piety, nor patriotism that persuaded any of that Nation to Presbytery, nor had
they any of those three qualities in them that were the perswaders; yet let us
not think it strange: for, as a cup of good Sack will make one fight, where
Reason cannot prompt him to it, when he is sober; so will the vapouring words
of fiery preachers oftentimes intoxicate a giddy-headed populass, when sound
and solid instructions are able to make no impression.

But that all Scotland, comprehending all the degrees of its inhabitants,
should have been brought under that yoke, is (in my opinion) the only miracle
that was performed by Presbytery, and one (I think) never a whit lesser then
any mentioned in the Romish Legend, had that people of late been endowed with
spirits equal to those of their predecessors. This degenerate deviation has
made most of the Nations of Christendom (if not all) look asquint upon them.

When the Presbyterians of Scotland prevailed against the King's party, they
entitled themselves The people of God, because of their victories; which
appellation, for such a reason, is every whit as due to the Great Turk, by
having subjugated to his Scepter all the Christians of Greece and Armenia. They
likewise prove in Scotland the same conclusion by their being afflicted; which
title (should it require no other cause) might as properly have been applied to
the Canaanites and Gibeonites. After such a manner of reasoning, we may infer
all things to be precious and sweet, that are of the color of Gold and Honey:
we may very well know, that affirmatively to attribute one general thing to
two, makes not therefore those two things to be one.

In a word, if that their seeming wisdom in Divinity had bin turned to a more
real performance of goodness toward one another, they would have gained more
Proselytes. I would not here have any man to think, that in twitting those men,
I speak against Learning, but plainly assever that the Divines, both Episcopal
and Presbyterian, by curbing men's Fancies, and suffering nothing to pass the
Press which did not like them, buried much Learning under the ashes of their
sullenness, which since their fall has begun to break forth into flashes of a
most comfortable flame and cheerful light. Of Presbytery at this time will I
not speak much more, because to rip it up to the full would require a Volume by
it self.

Another part of your Letter seems to import, that you do not hold your
selves under this Government so altogether free as formerly you were. What is
(I pray you) the freedom you had under the Presbyter? was there any but such as
shored up their interests, that could say he had a propriety to his own goods?
was there ever any thing more common amongst the Kirk-men there, then to preach
men out of their estates, which no other Protestants of this Isle did offer to
do, but they? By which tyranny of theirs, and other pressures proceeding from
them, the most part of the inhabitants of that Land were so heavily oppressed,
that laying aside those that are sequestered, whereof there are not many, the
remanent of the Country is now under a far more easy yoke then it was at any
time these nine years past: for although the Sess in Scotland be six times
greater then in England, and truly more then that poor Country can well bear;
yet is it much less then it was under the Government of Presbytery: for I have
known Gentlemen there, whose whole rents were taken up to the payment of
Public dues, etc.

It sticks (I know) in your stomachs, that the English should be your Masters:
yet to be united with England, and to be accounted as one Nation, I believe you
would not think dishonorable. The territories of these two dominions God has
joined and united; and truly I think that in former Ages it was the devil did
disunite their hearts; of which division the Frenches taking advantage, struck
in with the Scots: but what gain was it to Scotland to have their brothers in
England their enemies? or did your joining with France enrich Scotland? Did it
make your Traffic to flourish, or put your Gentlemen into any happy state? or
rather, did not your falling out with England put you into a quite contrary
condition, and made you such, that you had almost hardly any thing else to brag
of, but an ancient poverty, and invincible hatred against your brothers?

I know your common regret and condolement is, that Scotland was never so
before as it is now, it having enjoyed a longer Series of Kings, without
interruption of a Conquest, then any other kingdom in Europe, although their
subdument was attempted by the Romans, Picts, Danes, Saxons, and others, some
whereof went through with their designs in this your neighbour-nation of
England. What then? though England has had more change of Governors, so have
fair women of suitors, even unto prostitution: and therefore, if besides the
valor and prudence of the natives, any thing else, such as hills, bogs, heath,
hunger, cold, or suchlike, proceeding from the inaccessibility and poverty of
the Country, has kept you till now a Virgin-nation, unexposed to the embraces
of a foreign Conqueror, you have nothing there to boast of more then others,
whose valor being equal with yours, has been oftener broke, for the want of
these rugged assistances which do constantly attend you; a resistance made from
an intrinsecal virtue, being much more commendable, then a non-admittance
because of outward impediments: as a chaste woman at a Royal Court, is more
praiseworthy then an encloystred Nun.

To be a free Nation, is to be subject to reasonable men: for, to conquer our
own passions, and submit our selves to a just power, is the greatest freedom of
any. To be left at random without Governors; to be in a continual state of war
with your neighbors; or, like Cannibals, to be still devouring one another,
without fear of Law, or terror of punishment, is not to enjoy the liberty of a
free Nation; for that permission to do wickedly, cannot be accounted liberty in
a humane society; nor is the freedom of such of the West-Indian Savages as
remain unconquered, any great honor to them. After the Roman conquest of
Greece, (which nevertheless was accounted (and that deservedly) a very warlike
Nation) the Athenians and Lacedmonians, who before that time did constantly war
against one another, lived then together in a very peaceable tranquillity, and
were not ashamed of their subjection to the Roman Authority. What feuds have
you had in Scotland, to the utter undoing of several great Families, even when
you did repute your selves as free a people as any in the world? If now you
would attain to the renown of being an honorable Nation, strive with the
English by way of emulation, who shall love other best, who shall show most
valor against a foreign invader, who shall be most judicious in Counsel, who
shall give greatest encouragement to Trading, and Merchandise it with most
dexterity. You would have thought it a most glorious thing to have conquered
England, although but to have done that in matter of the union of both Nations,
which king James, for all his somuch-cried-up wisdom, could not get
effectuated. What although the English have conquered the best part of
Scotland, if they have the same end before their eyes, which you would have
had? Nor can I imagine, so that you jointly become one Nation, that there is
any greater matter in it, whether the English or you have been most
instrumental in the means whereby that great work is accomplished, then whether
with the right or left hand we shall eat, so the meat be good, and that we
digest it well.

The Picts have been amongst you, and you expelled them: so were the Danes and
Saxons, and you likewise overthrew them: the Romans have been there also, and
you embraced their language: nor do I think it is for naught that you have
these many ages past spoke the English tongue: they are now come to dwell
amongst you, to acquaint you as well with their virtues, as with the dialect of
their speech; and if they do it in somewhat more then equal terms, do not you
nevertheless offer to repine thereat; the Sabins were in a better condition
then ever, after their conjunction with the Romans, although the Sabins were
the more ancient people, and that the Roman name swallowed up the glory of the
other. You should not flatter your selves with fond conceits, and thereby incur
the danger of losing the substance for the shadow; for to be such a Free-Nation
as to be civil with authority above others, is a thing rather to be wished for
then expected by you: the sovereign of the Planets has removed his beams the
further from you, and N^ptune fettered you with his watery shekels, that you may
not harbor in your mind such ambitious thoughts: it is much if the whole Isle
unanimously joined, perform such magnanimous achievements.

Now for your further information in this particular, I have thought it not
unexpedient to send you with this Letter, another of that worthy gentleman N.
LL. written to a gentleman in the country touching the dissolution of the late
Parliament, and the reasons thereof; wherein is shown you, how providence, many
times, by several invisible degrees, brings forth her proposed intendments with
those instruments, which seem to do the contrary; how many of the
Parliament Men were content to self-center, and lay little designs for their
own greatness, as if they had been called to the house to make up private
breaches, and not public ones: how private interests were carried on by way of
exchange: how incredibly long their delays were in granting of the most just
petitions: how they did spin out the time in the tossing of a feather even
whilst they suffered the weightiest mattes of any to sink: how unjust they were
in the courses taken for paying of Soldiers Debenters, and in their emitting
of Surveyors for overvaluing and undervaluing of lands to their own private
advantage, and palpable prejudice to the Commonwealth; and how by such means
men of inconsiderable fortunes before they were memberfied, had afterward
raised themselves to huge and vast estates.

He shows us also in in the same Letter, how God has singularly owned my Lord
GENERAL and his ARMY, in crowning them by very remarkable successes, and how
without the Army the Parliament had been exposed to the affronts of the
multitude, as when by the Apprentices they were shut up within doors: he tells
us how the liberty of the people being recovered by the sword, the Army ought
to be the supervisor of those liberties, that no incroachment be permitted to
be made thereupon: and that he who has power to command, has also power to
guide, the one without the other being insignificant: he expresses likewise,
how the formerly-mentioned defects and abuses were to be redressed and remedied
either by the Parliament, People, or Army: the first were so cunning they would
not; the second so unskilful that they could not; and that therefore it was
incumbent to the third like wise guardians to do it: and thus as arbitrators
taking into their most serious consideration the safety of the people, whereof
themselves were a part, after they had perceived that neither addresses,
reasons, proposals, nor petitions could prevail any thing, they were forced to
have recourse to that of the Physician ure and seca: furthermore he shows, to
the end we startle not at the change of the Supreme Authority from the name of
Parliament to that of Counsel, that it is of as little effect, and signifies
no more then if a King or State should make some alteration in the titles of
their credentials: being pleased hereto to subjoyn this Question, Whether it be
better to be in slavery under the name of Liberty, or in liberty under the
effects of slavery. All which, with many more, you in the said letter may
peruse at leisure, without omitting that passage of his where he says, that
the Presbyterian is a Jesuit in a Geneva-cloak, only some what more
insupportable.

Here without Latin, Greek, or any other language then plain English, have I
delivered my mind unto you, and that barely, without searching so much as one
testimony, or citing any place in either sacred or humane writings; for that
the truth seeks neither corners, nor embellishments; and that it is true which
I have written; it is my firm opinion, in which I intend to continue, till
with stronger arguments I be convinced, then as yet I have mentioned, or shall
be able to produce, in asserting my Lord Generals proceedings, and vindication
of his Excellency and honorable Council of Officers.

These things (I hope) you will take in the better part, that they have
proceeded from me who you know was never nor am a Papist; who am not, nor ever
will be a Presbyterian: and who affects no Sectarianism; but loves to be such a
sincere professors of the name of Christ, as to lay hold on faith in him, and
accordingly regulate the whole course of my life thereby: and who besides those
adjuncts will not decline this other one, that I am a compatriot of yours, and
such a one (which I speak without either flattery or self-love) as has ever
from his years of discretion upwards, studied the promoval of the honor of his
native country, and prosecuted it to the outmost of his endeavors.

This Tusday the 17. May 1653. Your humble servant

FINIS.
In the title Page, next line but one before the imprinted, for added read
premised. Page 2. line 21. Read Prolixity whereof. page 2. lin. 25. read all
which,


