A NEW DECLARATION EROM THE ARMY UNDER Command of His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, CONCERNING Their just and present proceedings in behalf of the Commons
of England, and themselves; together with their Proposals and Desires,
concerning the Enemies of this Kingdom.

AS ALSO, Some Observeable Passage, touching the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Presented to the view of the whole Kingdom.

London, Printed for George Pleydell, Anno, 1647.

The substance of the Remonstrance from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and
the Army under his Command.
Collected and drawn up into sevorall Heads, for satisfaction to the whole
Kingdom.
WHen (by the blessing of God upon the endeavors of the army, and other Forces
of the parliament) the adverse Forces and Garrisons within this kingdom were
diffipated and reduced, a present quiet, and freedom of trade, and all
commerce, and business restored to all parts of the Kingdom, and an b^pefull
way made for settling of a sound and lasting peace, on good terms for the
interest of the Kingdom, but instead of the hoped fruit of the labors and
hazzards of this army, and of the Kingdoms vast expense, immediately appeared
the cross workings of a strong and prevalent party in the parliament, City,
and Kingdom, (as appears by the late combination and treasonable Engagement
against the Parliament, Army and Kingdom. By which means the Speakers of both
houses, together with most of the Lords, and a very great number of the most
faithful and unquestioned Members of the house of Commons were driven away, so
as they could not with safety attend their service in Parliament, nor with
freedom discharge their trust to the Kingdom therein, but were forced to fly
to their army for safety. Notwithstanding which, diverse Members of both houses,
taking this opportunity of time to carry on their Designs, when very few were
left but of their own party, did continue to meet in the usual places at
Westminster, and took upon them the Name of Both Houses of Parliament: and
having chosen a new Speaker, did proceed to vote and act as a Parliament, and
adjorned from time to time, and immediately voted and called in to the service
of the house the eleven impeached Members, and also those who upon former Votes
of the House were suspended, or under question to be put out for Delinquencie:
With this pretended house of Commons thus composed, and four or five Lords of
the same model, for an house of Peers, they proceed to set up a Committee for
sasety; whereof all or most of the said impeached members were a part.

Their pretenses were to bring up the King to London with delay, and to stop
the nearer approach of the army. Concerning which, the General has expressed
himself very worthily, in behalf of himself and the army, in these words. For
our parts we shall rejoice as much as any, to see the King brought back to
his Parliament, and that not so much in place, as in affection and agreement,
on such sound terms and grounds as may render both him and the Kingdom, safe,
quiet, and happy, and shall be as ready as any to bring his Majesty to London,
when his being there may be likely to produce (not greater Disturbances or
Distractions, but) a Peace indeed, and that such as may not be shaped and
molded only to the private advantages of a particular party or faction, but
bottomed chiefly on grounds of common and public safety

That we have not minded nor bin acting our own works and interests, but the
kingdoms, and every honest man's in it.

And further it is declared, that concerning the just grounds of the armies
late advance to the City of London, were an action tending much to the welsare
and safety of the Kingdom, in restoring the Parliament to a condition of
safety, honor, and freedom, and a further trust has been thereupon committed
to the General, sor taking care with his Army to safegua^d the parliament.

The Houses being thus restored to a condition of present honor, safety, and
freedom two things seem clearly remaining to be done, viz. First, to
vindicate the honor, fredome and safety of parliament from the like affronts
and violence in future, and the army and kingdom from danger of the like
disturbances.

And secondly, to proceed unto a speedy settlement of the peace of the Kingdom.
It is further declared in these words, That unless it should be thought fit to
secure the parliament, by keeping the whole Body of the army, or so great a
part thereof to remain continually in and about London, as might be sure to
over power any future tumults or Force that may arise out of the City of
London, which neither the welfate of the City, and ease of the parts adjacent,
nor the safety of the Kingdom, in respect of the present posture of Affairs
will admit) it is absolutely necessary, that there be sp^edy and exemplary
justice done upon (at least) the chiese authors or abettors of the late
treasonable Engagement, and of the said force done to the parliament, and upon
the chief actors in maintenance and prosecution thereof, whereby men may be
deterred from the like in future.

The particulars of Obstructions.
1. The late War intended against the Army, and Kingdom 2. The designs of
the Militia 3. The proceedings of the Members, when the Speakers and diverse
well affected Members were forced to reside with the Army (yet some well
affected staid behind, with an eye on the adjourning of the Parliament 4. A
charge against diverse Members who were active in the late Design against the
Army and Kingdom. 5. That the mayor part of the Members that sat at
Westminster in the Speakers absence, drove on a treasonable Engagement to
destroy the Parliament and Army.

These, with diverse other particulars, were assented to, by the General and
His Council of war, which are too large to insert here.

FINIS.

