A DECLARATION OF The High and Mighty LORDS, THE STATES of HOLLAND, CONCERNING
The Parliament and Commonwealth of England; With their Instructions and Decree
given to the Lord High-Admiral Vaentrump, for the taking of all English and
Scottish ships: And his Resolution to fight it out to the last man, against all
those who shall engage against Them: Together with the advancing of the King of
Scots Standard; his Royal Message to 7 Christian Kings and Princes: And L. Col.
Lilburns Letter to the Lord Genesis Cromwell.

London, Printed for G. HORTON. 1652.

THE DECLARATION Of the States of HOLLAND, Concerning the proclaiming of open
Wars with the Parliament of England.
SIR,
IN my last of the 25 of March, I acquainted you with the Warlike preparations
of the States General: since which time they are pleased to set forth a new
Edict, prohibiting the transportation of any English Goods whatsoever, and have
declared their disaffection to the proceedings of the English, accasioned by
their seizing upon the Flemish Vessels; in retaliation whereof, they have given
strict charge and command, that all ships and goods whatsoever belonging to the
English Nation, be forthwith seized upon; as also also the Scottish ships are
detained by the Lord High-Admiral Vantrump, who has declared, that according
to his Commission received from the high and mighty Lords, the States of
Holland, he is resolved to fight all those who shall dare to prefume, or
attempt the disturbance of the peace and welfare of the freeborn People of the
United Provinces, etc. As for other matter of intelligence, I shall refer you
to the enclosed, wherein is comprised several remarkable passages of great
concernment, which I conceived requisite to present to public view, viz.

The Hollander has set forth a Declaration to raise 60000 Horse and Foot; and
300 Sail of ships; but their design is variously spoken of.

Yet great are the Contests between the Burgomasters and the Bores; for the
latter does threaten to sequester their Estates, and bring them to a Trial for
their lives, if they will not take a course to defend and assist them at Sea.
And some Tumults and Risings have already been in Zealand, Rotterdam, Dort,
Delf, and at the Hague, where many were both slain and wounded, and amongst the
rest some English, which the Mutiniers chiefly aimed at, who brand them with
the most infamous Badge of Traitors and Conspirators to their Religion and
Liberties; etc.

The Duke of Malta has declared, that he will give his Royal Assent to the
Union, and that he will raise forty thousand Horse and Foot, to join with the
Christians against the Turks; and in pursuance thereof has granted a
Commission to Prince Frederick, Landgrave of Hesse, to command in chief under
his Highness Prince Philips.

It is reported, that Lieu. Col. Lilburn is made Captain of a Man of War for
the States of Holland; and that he has received Power and Instructions, to
fire, sink, or take, any ships whatsoever, that shall be declared Enemies to
the United Provinces.

SIR,
THere has been a great and imperial Council held at Munster in Germany, by
the Ambassadors of 13 Christian Kings, Princes, and Dukes; At which Diet, they
took into consideration the present state and condition of many exiled Princes;
and amongst the rest, a Conference arose touching the King of Scots; but
nothing done therein (at present) by reason of other weighty and emergent
businesses, which call them to a Work of far greater concernment; and may also
prove fatal, if not timely prevented: For the Great Turk, and his Bashaw have
taken the field with seven hundred thousand Horse and Foot, and are resolved
(if possible) to make a great devastation and inroad upon Christendom this
Summer: But great is the care of the Emperor of Germany, the 7 Christian
Princes of Italy, the Queen of Sweden, the Prince of Transylvania, and Prince
Frederick of Malta, to raise a formidable Power, and to unite and join with the
Venetians, both in an offensive and defensive War against the Turks; And in
pursuance thereof, a League is concluding between the aforesaid Princes; who
have had a large consultation thereupon; But that which is thought most
requisite and feasible at present, is, the sending of a Summons to all
Christendom, for Warlike Provisions to be made against the Enemies thereof; And
indeed great reason have they so to do; for never was a more potent and
irresistible Army raised these many years, as now the Turks and Janisaries have
raised. Yet notwithstanding, Prince Philip (the third Son to the Queen of
Bohemia, and General to the Stases of Venice) has given them a great Overthrow
near the Isle of Candia, and killed, taken, and routed about threescore
thousand men: This Overthrow does exceedingly retard the Enemies Design; and as
it is a great prejudice to them, so it is a great advantage to Christendom; And
his Highness Prince Philip has embraced this opportunity; who by the
assistance of the Divine Power, has obtained another great Victory against the
Janisaries: Since which Achievements, he is called Philip the Great; a
Gentleman of a gallant temper, and endowed with excellent Properties and
Virtues, both for prudence, wisdom, and magnanimity of Spirit: He is even
become as great a Terror to the Turks, as Alexander the Great was to the
Christians.

The King of Scots has sent the Lord Wilmot with a Message to the Princes of
Italy, imploring Supplies and Accommodation, suitable to his present
Necessities and Condition; but they have returned Answer, That by reason of the
homebred divisions they cannot assist him; but promise fair when a feasible
opportunity shall serve: which I conjecture may come to pass about
Latter-Lammass. By reason that we have received some inclination that the
States of Holland have declared for a Union with the Parliament of England; and
have Ordered that those ships and goods formerly seized on (belonging to the
English) be forthwith discharged and set at liberty. Lieut. Col. Lilburn is
very active in stirring up the well-affected English; And some relate, that he
has sent a Letter to the Lord General, putting his Exceliency in mind of his
Protestation at Huntington; wherein he desires him to stand up against
Oppression; to propogate the Gospel; to preserve the liberty of the People, and
to maintain their just rights and privileges.

FINIS.

