A DECLARATION OR MANIFEST OF The High and Mighty Lords THE STATES GENERAL OF
THE United Netherland Provinces:

Comprehending A true Relation of their sincere intention, and lawful
proceedings in the Treaty with the Extraordinary Ambassadors, and the
Commissionaries of the present Government of England, so as the same has been
held here in the Hague, as also at London.

And likewise Of the unjust and violent proceedings of those of the said
Government, which have forced the said States General by way of retortion, to
defend their State and Subjects against their Oppressions.

At AMSTERDAM, Translated out of the Original Copy, Printed in the Hague by
the Widow and Heirs of Hillebrandt Jacobsz van Wouw. 1652.

THe States General of the United Netherlands unto all, which may see or hear
this read, send greeting. Whereas all lawful Magistrates (as being ordained by
God Almighty to take care of the welfare of their subjects) are bound, not only
to govern the same with discretion, and to maintain them in good order and
lawful policy; and further, wisely and prudently to prevent and suppress all
outward occasions, whereby the rest and tranquillity of their said subjects
might be disturbed, or they undergo losses or oppression: and to that end it be
esteemed both honorable and profitable with good and due offices to have all,
especially their Neighboring States and Countries obligued to them, whereby
they may retain a wel-grounded and assured confidence of each others fidelity,
and when any distemper is befalne, may with the most easy and peaceable means
compose the same in all love and friendship. But moreover it be required of
them, when the cause is so exigent, and no other means can prevail, to use the
power and strength given them of God Almighty, and consequently their weapons,
and therewith manly and courageously to oppose and suppress all violence and
injury done to their said dear subjects, and cause them to obtain satisfaction
and repairation for all wrongs and damages which unjustly were inflicted upon
them. And we with a complete, upright, and good intention endeavoring alike
the performance of both, do thank God, that he has so blessed our rule, love,
and care to and for the good of our subjects, that they have requited the same
with manifest expressions of their real love and ready obedience, tending both
to their and our welfare, strength and conservation. And in respect of the
English Nation, have ever, not only with all unfainedness and holiness on our
parts maintained all friendship and good correspondency, which of old used to
be observed between them and us: but moreover the said English Nation now of
late being disturbed within her own bowels, and rent in factions, and the
people highly exasperated one against the other, we have not only with sorrow
and sadness of heart beheld the same, and abstained from all partial actions,
whereby we might incur the just displeasure or dis^ffaction of either side: and
moreover, as much as possibly we could, prevented and stopped all succor from
us to either of them, whereby the fire which was kindled might be fomented, the
breach made larger, and the cure more difficult and perilous; but also when
the aforesaid destractions had in some parts of their Country occasioned wast,
desolation, poverty, want of food; and we, by both Houses of Parliament at that
time being, were earnestly entreated to admit of a public collection in our
Churches for the consolation and sustenance of many impoverished and needy
people in the said parts: the representation of the said calamities did so work
upon our hearts and the hearts of our good subjects with tender pity and
Christian compassion, that upon the said entreaty a considerable sum of money,
to the value of certain Tonnes of gold, was gathered in, and to the said end
exported out of this Country, insomuch that the said Houses of Parliament did
cause their Letters of Thanksgiving to be dispatched unto us, and to be
exhibited and confirmed by the mouth of their public Minister, with external
demonstrations of great affection. With all which, finding our selfs not fully
satisfied, but being deeply touched with a longing zeal and fervent desire, to
see an end put to all these said misunderstandings, and thence arising
troubles, and to have a true, upright, and innerly reconciliation made between
these two so much each against the other incensed and exasperated parties;
trusting we had given such manifest demonstrations of our true intentions
herein, that we had hoped we might prove acceptable, and thereby also fitting
instruments to help the furtherance of so good and great a work: to that
purpose did undertake to make a trial thereof, by sending to the King and both
Houses of Parliament an Embassage Extraordinary imposed upon the Lords William
Boreel and Johan van Rheede, Lord of Renswoude, etc. But God Almighty in his
incomprehensible judgment not seeing good to put an end to the said
distractions by appeasing the same, but by other means having settled the state
of that Government upon another ground then formerly it was maintained by; and
the said Government offering unto us a treaty of mutual Union and nearer
Alliance; we believing the same was presented in all sincerity and uprightness,
and considering that thereby might be obtained security of Navigation and
Commerce, not only for us, but also for all Trading Kingdoms and Countries,
especially the Neighboring, which otherwise in regard of diverse common
Interests, through misunderstandings arising between us and the said
Government, inevitably would be disturbed; we have not only showed our selfs
most willing and ready to accept of the said motion, but the said Government to
that purpose having sent over unto us the Lords, Oliver S. John, and Walter
Strickland their Ambassadors Extraordinary: we have also endeavored in all
manner to comply with them, and to facilitate the means to bring the said
treaty to a happy conclusion, as far as the constitution of our present
Government was able to suffer. So that the said Lords Ambassadors being entered
into conference with our Lords the Committee ordained out of the midst of us to
that purpose; and having made unto them a general and unlimited Proposition,
after that we had made manifest unto them our sincere inclination and true love
to Peace and Unity, they were in our behalf requested, that the said general
Proposition by a nearer Exposition might be opened might be opened and
distinguished in clear and near points, that thereby upon sure and firm
grounds things might be brought to a good conclusion; and although several
well-grounded reasons were alleged, and by several contra-propositions good
way was made for an agreement: Nevertheless at that time we could advance
nothing, but that the said Lords Ambassadors, when a short time was expired
after their first audience, the substance it self not once yet being touched,
gave countenance that they were to depart. But through sundry persuasions, at
last admitting of a willingness to prolong their time of staying, and having
since exhibited nearer Propositions, we have with all speed approved our selfs
so, that the said Lords Ambassadors, upon the said nearer Propositions (which
themselfs declared to be of greatest concernment, and of such consequence, that
when once we should come to be of one resolution concerning the same, there
would be little difficulty in the other) have received from us such reflection,
that in the substance there remained no difference, or if any, but very small;
and we of our parts moreover revealed all that we found conducing further to
the good of both Nations, that might be agreed upon with maintenance of the
alliances we have with other Kings, Republiques, Princes and States, and so all
that was needful for the consummating of the said treaty; whereunto expecting
the nearer Declaration of the said Lords Ambassadors, they declined the same by
their sudden departure, intimating, that the time granted unto them for their
staying was expired, and consequently that they could not possibly proceed to
an answer unto that which was propounded by us, to the end aforesaid. And
although the said manner of proceeding might afford matter of several
suspicions, concerning the intention of the said Government, in relation to the
said treaty: because the intercurrence of a short time, which had made no
alteration in the cause it self, ought not to have altered the good
inteutions, and consequently ought not to have made any such interruption in
the progress of the treaty: we notwithstanding on our parts (preferring the
dignity and acceptablenesse of the cause it self before all outward ceremonies,
and considering the protestation made by their said Lords Ambassadors at their
departure from hence, of the sincere inclination of the said Government toward
peace, and of their confidence, that although their endeavors had not been so
successive, as to attain to a happy period, the same notwithstanding might not
prove unfruitful, when time should come, that we with a contra-visit should
please to resort unto them) have not omitted to decree a considerable Embassage
to the said Government, and accordingly in December last year sent thither the
Lords Jacob Cats, Gerard Schaep, and Paulus van de Par, our Ambassadors
Extraordinary, with full power and instructions for a Treaty. Although since
the departure from hence of the said Lords S. John and Strickland, by a certain
discourteous and unneighbourly Act, published by the said Government, whereby
the usual liberty of Trade was manifestly restrained, the good corresdondency
between both Nations (whereby true friendship and fidelity were wont best to
increase and be confirmed) was in that part evidently cut off, and several of
our Ships surprised, all which gave more and more suspicions, that the
intentions of the said Government was no way answerable to our unfeigned
openheartedness, which afterward did most evidently appear to be so. For after
that our said Ambassadors Extraordinary were arrived in England, and there had
made an earnest and upright Declaration, of our sincere affection toward the
consummating of the aforementioned inchoated treaty, with serious Requests,
that the same might speedily and happily be brought to a perfection, and to
that end all things might stand in the same posture, wherein they were left at
that time, when the said Lords St. John and Strickland departed from us; at
least till the event of that Treaty might be known: and to that purpose the
said Act (by which the life and being of the said Treaty would be infringed)
might be repealed, or at least the execution thereof suspended, and the
surprised Ships and goods restored: The same has not only not been taken into
consideration by the said Government, as was fitting it should according to
reason and equity; but contrarily (during the said Treaty for the renewing and
confirming of old Covenants and Amity, and of the entrance into nearer
confederacy and compliance of Love and Union) the said Act was put in
Execution, and moreover under several unreasonable pretenses, as partly with
Letters of Mart, granted by the said Government without cause (in respect we
never denied or delaid Justice to any of their offended subjects, being
therefore contrary to the Laws and practices of all civilized Governments, and
to all former Covenancs erected betwixt both Nations) partly with Commissions
given against the French, the Ships of our said Subjects have been assaulted at
Sea, entered, surprised, and brought up into their Havens in a most hostile
manner, the Goods plundered, the Masters and Mariners roughly used, as well by
their public Ministers, as by those which were enabled by the said Letters or
Commissions, and thereby given occasion to all sorts of Robbers under the same
pretenses, to exercise their piracy, not giving regard to the constant
solicitings of our said Ambassadors to the said Government, that they would
please to cause such actions to cease; much less making restitution to our
good Subjects of their surprised and plundered ships and goods. And although by
these unneighbourly actions we had just cause given us to manifest our resent,
and by retortion to seek repairation of the damages, which our Subjects
sustained, from and upon the ships and goods of the Subjects of that
Government, (...) being thereunto highly provoked through an unsufferable
outrage: Nevertheless hoping the said Government would once give place to
reason, and that by way of treaty, according to justice and equity, all
differences might be composed; we have absteined from all manner of fact; yea
though earnestly entreated, have refused to give our Letters of Mart or
Commissions to our wronged Subjects for reasons aforementioned; and of our
side through our Ambassadors Extra-ordinary with all earnestness sought the
accomplishing of the said treaty in general, and of the aforementioned
surprised ships and goods in particular: and on the other side to prevent all
piracy and robbery for the future, and to free our Subjects from further
losses, and the general commerce from a total ruin and spoil; we resolved
to set out at sea a considerable fleet of ships, and to prevent jealousies, and
that the said Government might not mis-apprehend of this our doing (as we did
like wise to other our friends and neighboring countries) by our Ambassadors
extra-ordinary we gave notice unto them in all sincerity of this our
resolution, with open and upright manifestations, that the said ships should
not at the least be employed to inflict any hurt upon our friends and
confederates, and namely also not upon the Subjects of their Government: but
that we were of a settled resolution to maintain all good compliance and
friendship with them in sincerity, as was becoming two such neighboring
Nations. And although we expected that this notice given, ought also to have
been accepted of by them, as a token of our unfainednesse, especially because
the said Government a little time before had manifested their distaste, that a
small number of our ships, not giving them timely notice aforehand, had showed
themselfs near unto some Islands, which then our ships knew not to be under
their command: Notwithstanding we observed, that the said Government daily
aiming at nothing more, then to gather pretenses, whereby to give a color to
the execution of their long threatened designs, have also looked upon the said
notification with the same glance: insomuch that our Ambassadors were
necessitated in our behalf to bring more proofs whereby to make the truth
thereof more apparent unto them. And in the mean time, that the said treaty
was seriously followed by our said Ambassadors, who endeavored to bring the
same into such a posture, that the said Government should be induced to declare
themselves, and no longer to conceal their secret designs, tending to the
destruction of our commerce, and the disabling of the strength of our state,
under seeming pretenses of friendship, and feeding us with the hopes and
appearances of a treaty: as we have most evident proofs of this their doing:
Our Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, whom we made General of our said Navy, was by
them encountered with a full broad side in an hostile manner, and several of
the men of his ship miserably wounded, because he did not strike the flagge
according to their fancy, though nevertheless according to diverse unanimous
Declarations and evidences taken of neutrall and unpartiall men, he was busy
with haling in of his Mars-sayle, and causing of his boat to be haled on,
whereby to send one of his Officers aboard of the Admiral of the said
Government to congratulate him with all due respects; by which encounter our
said Lieutenant Admiral, and the rest of the ships under his command, were
necessitated to defend themselves, and did moderate their defense so
irreprehensibly, in regard of the English Navy, that whereas ours were far
stronger in number of ships, and able to have wholly ruinated their invaders,
they refrained themselves and rested satisfied with their only defense. Which
discretion notwithstanding by the adverse party was so little respected, that,
coming up with a second Esquadron of ships, they did likewise in their former
hostile manner assault the hindermost of our ships, which were separated from
the body of our fleet, overcame two of them, and took one away. And to make
this encounter serve them for a pretense, to break the aforesaid treaty, they
gave out and published amongst their people, and have endeavored to make the
whole world believe, that the first assault in the said encounter was made by
our side, and thence pretend to be wronged and affronted in the highest degree,
and set themselves in a posture of open war against us, before they once made
the least complaint thereof unto us, much less damanding reparation for the
said trespass, which they pretend to be committed, which reason and respect to
the treaty in hand, if ever their intention toward the same had been real,
might have persuaded them. On the contrary we on our sides endeavoring with
true and upright hearts and minds to reduce into a due Frame and Order, what
might be displaced and out of order; our aforesaid Ambassadors Extraordinary,
no sooner had received intelligence of the said accident, but with most
seriousness protested and declared before the Council of State of the said
Government, that if things had been acted, as they related the same, that we
were wholly ignorant thereof, and to be done quite contrary to our exprrsse
order, which they confirmed by exhibiting the original letter written unto
them by the aforesaid our Admiral concerning the said subject, comprehending a
perfect relation of the commission we gave him, and solemnly attesting of our
intimate desires, and hearty inclinations to have and maintain peace and unity
with the said Government by a firm alliance, and indissoluble amity: and with
great zeal and earnest instances beseeched them, that there might a nearer
search be made into the truth of passages befallen in the said encounter, and
thereupon communicated unto them the evidences taken there, to be sent over
unto us: and desired that in the mean time the treaty, which they supposed was
brought so far, that in a short time it might receive its happy period, might
not be retarded by an unexpected casualty, beyond and against will, surely of
us, through inconsiderateness and rashness of one of the two parties
officers, who were to give account of their actions, and that the same might
not put the cause in a farther distance. And although this proposition was of
great consequence and highest importance for the common good of both nations,
the said government notwithstanding in a long time have not dained our
Ambassadors, nor us, in whose behalf the same was propounded, with their
answer: being however by our special command a second time put in mind
thereof by our said Ambassadors, who again delivered over the said renewed
proposition, and afterward reiterated it once more, with further confirmations
of our upright intention and hearty displeasure against the said unexpected and
unhappy encouneer of the said Fleets. Yea on the contrary laid hold upon all
Ships of traffic and men of war, which they could light on at Sea, belonging
to these Provinces, taking or sinking some with violence, misleading others
under show, and sending them up into their harbors, also plundring and
misusing the Seamen and Soldiers, and imprisoning diverse, as if we were in
open wars with each other, without a forgoing public denial of their
Friendship toward us, which has occasioned the loss of much innocent blood,
and the utter undoing of several of our subjects in their estates. All which
extreme provocations we have with patience undergone to justify before the
world our peaceable minds, and the uprightness and lawfulness of our
proceedings, as showing that nothing is more dear unto us then the
accomplishment, preservation and augmentation of good union, true confidence,
faithfulness and amity with our neighbors; and contrariwise nothing more
detestable then the horrible fruits of a consuming war, and direful wasting of
innocent Christian blood: And in consideration thereof besides our aforesaid
three Ambassadors which we had sent to the aforesaid Government for the making
and establishing of the abovesaid alliance, we have moreover resolved upon a
second Embassage Extraordinary to be sent to the said Government, and therefore
dispatched unto them the Lord Adrian Pauw, Lord of Heemstede, our Pensionary
Counselor of Holland and Westfricsland, especially upon the subject of the
said late encounter and its influences, and with more serious expressions of
our upright meaning and desire to pacify the matter. And the said Government
having in the mean time given out their answer to the aforesaid proposition
and iterative representation of the same made unto them by our former
Ambassadors, in which answer having bended their affections to embrace a bad
and sinister impression, which they wittily fitted and framed for a color to
their unjust and ungodly designs, as if we had set out and managed our said
fleet, for to make war against them, and to destroy their Navy, or to show
other actions of hostility, violence or oppression against their subjects,
without any regard to all former serious attestations and protestations to the
contrary, have declared, that they found themselves obliged to endeavor, with
Gods assistance, as they shall have opportunity, to seek repairation of the
wrongs (as they say) already suffered and security that the like be not
attempted for the future. And thereby showed they had neither will nor
inclination, to bring the matter to an accommodation, but were minded to go on
with matters of fact: The abovesaid Lord of Heemstede, both before the
Parliament of England, as likewise afterward before the Council of State,
with strong and most clear arguments disproving the truth of the said
impression, and calling God almighty, the searcher of all hearts, to witness
(he having perfect cognizance of all our affairs, because, in regard of his
public charge, he had been present in all our consultations, held both in our
assemblies and in the assemblies of the States of Holland and Westfrisland)
could and did holily protest and depose for the assured truth, that never any
deliberation was held, nor resolution taken, much less any power or commission
given directly or indirectly, to give any the least cause of offense to the
said Government, which is far from an intention to of doing any injury to the
said Fleet, or any ships belonging to the same, but surely to the contrary,
that they had order to manifest unto them all tokens of friendship and
propitious affection: and once more from the bottom of heart with all
uprightness protested, that the above said Sea Fight, between the two Fleets
happened without our knowledge or order, to our great sorrowfulness and
astonishment. And considering that nevertheless the said Government made
another construction of that sad accident, then in truth it could afford,
making the said conflict a rock of offense, and in their aforesaid answer spoke
of reparation of the wrongs and security for the future: the said Lord of
Heemstede, according to instructions which he had received from us, confessing,
that the said rock of offense ought accordingly to be removed, and all matter
of diffidence taken away, and that he to that purpose and for the compassing
thereof especial^y was delegated and sent over unto them, and to facillitate
the means thereunto, he labored diligently to have the said inchoated and
already far brought treaty in hand to go on, and that further to the
contentation of both States good instructions and orders might be framed and
given to the said Fleets on both sides, which might be to them a rule for the
future how to carry themselves to each other, assuring them also, that we never
was minded to call in question the honor and respect, which in former times by
this state was wont to be deferred unto them: Requesting further, that the said
Government in the mean time, whilst they might be busy in treating upon so
good a matter, would once at length prudently give order, that all further ways
of fact so long continued in respect of the aforementioned sad accident, might
cease, whereas otherwise the evil was like to grow incurable. And after that
in diverse particular conferences held with the Lords of the Committee of the
said Council of State, further declaring himself in our behalf requested and
presented, that a more narrow search might be made into the evidences given in
by both parties concerning the said encounter by committees appointed on both
sides, and the same being examined and the naked truth found out, which side
made the first atach, and thereby gave occasion for the further disorder and
distemper thence arising; and if it should appear that our Admiral made the
first attach, he not only should undergo reproof, and his action be
dissallowed, but also, as having gone beyond his Commission, be punished
according as the fact should seem to have deserved: provided that the said
Government finding the case to be otherwise, that their Admiral by the
evidences being found to have given the first hostile attach, he in like manner
undergo punishment according as his act may have deserved: Renewing his and
our other Ambassadors their former and so often reiterated request, that at
least whilst this proposition might be taken into consideration, the former
treaty in points of most concernment might be insisted upon and furthered, the
Ships and goods of our subjects, taken with violence, and brought up into their
Harbors, restored, our Captains, Ship-masters and Mariners relaxed and set
free, and all further acts of hostility cease. And although this proposition
was of such nature, that no reasonable soul, in which is but remaining any
spark of inclination to peace, ought to reject the same: and that all this was
illustrated with sundry examples observed in like cases between other nations,
and was confirmed by diverse solemn alleged treaties; notwithstanding the said
Council of State, being convicted in their hearts, that their declaration
concerning what happened in and about the said Sea Fight could not endure the
light, and therefore having no mind to search into the truth (the concealing
whereof ought to be counted sacrilege to every man though in a particular
case) they have absolutely cast off the said examination, stopped the progress
and continuance of the aforesaid principal treaty, and moreover declared, that
in the present constitution of things we might not expect from them, but that
they would persevere in the prosecution mentioned in their former answer given
to the propositions of the aforesaid Lords Cats, Schaep and van de Par, to such
end as was there exprssed. Which last answer being tarter than the former, and
more unreasonable, full of injustice and violence in respect of our honest
presentation: and such as gave cause sufficient to us to desist from all our
friendly endeavors, especially and the more because they made no end of
taking, robbing, plundering of ships and goods, pertaining to our good
subjects: nevertheless the said Lord of Heemstede, for to show our most
constant inclination and earnest desire that all to the contentation of both
sides with friendship might be brought to a good and wished conclusion, and to
that end only setting aside all that otherwise in point of honor and respect
might have been considerable, that the treaty might not wholly be broken off
desired, that in regard the endeavors on our part could not attain to the
honor of an happy issue: the aforesaid Government would please to think upon
some other propositions for a peaceable agreement, trusting that once reason
might find place with them, and credit be given to our upright and unfeined
protestations, and the sweet influences of a desire to peace consume the
turbulent thoughts of war, and the good God laying open unto us such means, the
present and further threatened calamities might be averted. But the said
Government, as it appeared, mis-using the superfluity of our pliantnes to the
fomentation of their pride and loftiness; our modesty to kindle their heat
toward destruction; our friendly presentations for a ground to work upon us
and demand of us things, which by them with no show of equity could be
demanded, nor by us with honor and reputation granted, and amongst the rest
were so unreasonable as to require of us the charges and damages, which they
pretend to have been put upon, and to have suffered by reason of our afoersaid
extraordinary preparation of ships, to the value of such a sum as the same
might be found to amount unto: and the same being paid or security for it given
to their content, then to have all acts of hostility to cease; nor once
minding, that our aforesaid setting forth of ships was to no other end
undertaken and effected, then is heretofore declared: and that as soon as the
same was resolved upon, and before it was put in action, we gave true and
public intelligence thereof to the said Government; especially seeing by the
same fleet or any other ships belonging to these Provinces, there has not been
given to the said Government, or to any of the subjects thereof, the least
token of disaffection, much less of injury; but cantrarily, that ours have
been assaulted by theirs, and some sunk, others (amongst which a great number
of merchants ships richly lodened pertaining to these Countries) entered,
overmastred, taken and carried up into their harbors, whereby we and our
subjects have suffered loss of several millions of gilders: yea moreover
during the said treaty and conference have sent their fleet to Sea, in all
rashness hurling on into the breach and dissolution of all friendship and amity
between both nations, with an insatiable lust of making the same incurable, and
therewith destroying and taking several of our ships more, enthralling our
Government (which by God Almighty for many years has been preserved in a
flourishing condition, and has given reputation and awsulness with their
friends and enemies) into a world of dishonor and losses. All which
intolerable and unlawful enterprises, and violent proceedings attempted and
performed by the said Government, do most perspicuously and palpably declare,
that their only design is, wholly to infringe our strength at sea, and to
ruinate the commerce of these countries, and thereby to set up their long
pretended Sovereignty and dominion over the Sea, which shortly they intend to
exercise over us, and in time over all other nations, and if possibly they can,
to make us and others their tributaries. And having with great patience and
meekness, but all in vain* improved all convenient means and rational
inductions, whereby to move the said Government for the good and happiness of
both their own and our subjects, to stand off from the said resolutions, that
the risen distempers might be aswaged and composed, the ships and goods, with
violence or otherwise taken and detained from our subjects, restored, the
losses, which they have innocently sustained made good; and by an upright and
strict binding treaty the old (but now of late times by that Government
enforced and violated) friendship re-setled, and by mutual confiding offices
more and more confirmed; but seeing no hope more of prevailing by such means,
We (according to the law of nature finding our selves obliged to defend our
good subjects against all injury, oppression and violence, to cause them obtain
reparation for the losses they have suffered, to re-establ^sh the former due
liberty of commerce, and to oppose the aforesaid pernicious designs of the
said Government, which being drunken with successes within their own
countries, seem to know no measure of their further unsatiable appetites
abroad) as being hereunto by greatest extremity impelled, with ripe,
deliberation of council, have at length resolved and thought good, to use the
power and means, which God and nature has given us, and with our weapons by
way of retorsion upon and against the aforesaid Government, and the subjects
thereof, to endeavor the obtaining of that, which with reason could not be
recovered of them; with a mind and intention not to lay down the same, as
long as the said Government does steer the course they now are in, and till
the aforesaid restitution of Ships and goods, and reparation of inferred
injuries be obtained. Being confident, that the whole world will approve of
this our resolution, forced from us with the utmost violence, and that Almighty
God will bless our just cause; trusting also that all Kings, Republikes,
Princes and States will take on this our manifest declaration for true, lawful
and requisite, and with us will help to oppose and subdue all such pernicious
designs, and in this our constrained and no less just and lawful defense,
ever and in all places, as occasion shall offer, will lend their assistance to
us and our good subjects. Even as we hereby ordeine all our said subjects to
the United Netherland Provinces, to oppose themselves by way of retorsion, as
aforesaid, against all the violence and oppressions, which more and more are
threatened against them: and not to suffer themselves further to be deluded by
any whatsoever show of friendship, or willingly to have recourse to any place,
where they must be used according to the appetite of the said Governmenti: And
so both we and our subjects confiding in the justness of our cause, shall hope
for the blessing upon the means assumed for our lawful defense from God
Almighty.

Thus concluded and arrested in the Gathering of the said Potent Lords the
States General, in the Hague, the second of August sixteen hundredth and two
and fifty. Signed Johan van Reed tot Renswoude vt. and understood: By special
command from the same: signed N. Ruysch. And in the further space bearing the
impression of the great Seal of the said States General in red wax.


